Cambodia National Action Plan on Drought Management and Adaptation (2025–2030)

Ministry of Water Resources and Meteorology (MoWRAM), 
Cambodia National Mekong Committee (CNMC), 
Tonle Sap Authority, 
National Committee for Disaster Management (NCDM)

and 

World Meteorological Organization (WMO), 
Global Water Partnership Southeast Asia (GWP-SEA), 
Climate Risk and Early Warning Systems (CREWS) Initiative, 
SDG 6 IWRM Support Programme (GWP and UNEP-DHI), 
Integrated Drought Management Programme (IDMP)

Introduction

This solution, Cambodia National Action Plan on Drought Management and Adaptation (2025–2030) addresses natural catastrophe through public private partnerships in Cambodia between Ministry of Water Resources and Meteorology (MoWRAM), Cambodia National Mekong Committee (CNMC), Tonle Sap Authority, National Committee for Disaster Management (NCDM), World Meteorological Organization (WMO), Global Water Partnership Southeast Asia (GWP-SEA), Climate Risk and Early Warning Systems (CREWS) Initiative, SDG 6 IWRM Support Programme (GWP and UNEP-DHI), and Integrated Drought Management Programme (IDMP). The program was implemented in 2025 and focuses on collaboration, raising awareness, and leveraging tech.

Description

The Cambodia National Action Plan on Drought Management and Adaptation (2025–2030) is a strategic initiative aimed at transitioning Cambodia from reactive drought response to proactive risk management. It integrates forecasting, early warning, governance, infrastructure, and community-level adaptation to address the increasing frequency, severity, and duration of droughts in Cambodia due to climate change. The plan is structured around six pillars: governance and institutional coordination, risk assessment and planning, forecasting and early warning systems, climate-resilient policies and infrastructure, capacity development, and financing alignment.

Key Highlights

The plan emphasizes a multi-stakeholder governance mechanism led by MoWRAM, integrating national and basin-level coordination. It includes comprehensive risk assessments and prioritizes early warning systems to reach vulnerable populations. The initiative also focuses on climate-resilient infrastructure and water-use efficiency, supported by regional and international collaborations. Capacity development is a key component, with training and knowledge exchange facilitated by international partners.

Results

Cannot be determined.

Contact Information

Name: Valentin Aich, 
Position:Focal Point, 
Company:SDG 6 IWRM Support Programme 
Email: sdg6iwrmsp@gwp.org, 
Contact Number: +45 4516 9200
, 
Organization: SDG 6 IWRM Support Programme, 
Email: sdg6iwrmsp@gwp.org, 
Contact Number: +45 4516 9200