FP272: Protecting livelihoods and assets at risk from Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) and climate change-induced flooding in glacial river basins of Nepal

Government of Nepal, 
Department of Hydrology and Meteorology (DHM), 
Department of Forests and Soil Conservation (DFSC)

and 

Green Climate Fund (GCF), 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), 
International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD)

Introduction

This solution, FP272: Protecting livelihoods and assets at risk from Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) and climate change-induced flooding in glacial river basins of Nepal addresses natural catastrophe through public private partnerships in Nepal between Government of Nepal, Department of Hydrology and Meteorology (DHM), Department of Forests and Soil Conservation (DFSC), Green Climate Fund (GCF), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), and International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD). The program was implemented in 2025 and focuses on collaboration and raising awareness.

Description

The GCF-UNDP Nepal GLOF Risk Project aims to protect lives and livelihoods from the risks posed by Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) and climate change-induced flooding in Nepal's glacial river basins. The project involves physical interventions to lower water levels in high-risk glacial lakes, expand hazard monitoring and early warning systems, implement ecosystem-based and eco-engineering measures, and build institutional capacity for climate risk integration and preparedness.

Key Highlights

The project focuses on physical risk reduction at four high-risk glacial lakes, expansion of early warning systems specific to GLOF risks, and the use of eco-engineering and nature-based solutions. It is designed with a gender-responsive approach and aims to institutionalize climate risk management from community to national levels. The project covers over 11,000 km² and aligns with Nepal's National Adaptation Plan and updated Nationally Determined Contributions. It serves as a replicable model for mountain adaptation and aims to catalyze co-financing towards a total of nearly US$50 million.

Results

The project targets direct benefits for 385,956 people (55% women) and indirect benefits for 1,986,980 people, totaling approximately 2.3 million beneficiaries. It aims to lower water levels in four lakes, upgrade early warning systems, expand hazard monitoring, and implement reforestation over 150 hectares. The project is valued at US$36.158 million from the GCF grant, with an additional US$13.786 million in co-financing.

Contact Information

Name: Karma Rapten, 
Position:Regional Technical Advisor – Climate Change Adaptation, 
Company:United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
Email: karma.rapten@undp.org, 
Contact Number: +977 1 4290000