Legal Agreement 


 

  CREDIT NUMBER D630-SO 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Financing Agreement 

 
(Somalia Crisis Recovery Project) 

 

 

 

between 

 

 

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF SOMALIA 

 

 

and 

 

 

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 

 

 

 

 

 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 

GRANT NUMBER D630-SO 

 

FINANCING AGREEMENT 

AGREEMENT dated as of the Signature Date between the FEDERAL REPUBLIC 

OF SOMALIA (“Recipient”) and INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 

(“Association”). The Recipient and the Association hereby agree as follows: 

ARTICLE I — GENERAL CONDITIONS; DEFINITIONS 

1.01. The General Conditions (as defined in the Appendix to this Agreement) apply to 
and form part of this Agreement. 

1.02. Unless the context requires otherwise, the capitalized terms used in this Agreement 
have the meanings ascribed to them in the General Conditions or in the Appendix 

to this Agreement.  

ARTICLE II — FINANCING 

2.01. The Association agrees to extend to the Recipient a grant, which is deemed as 
Concessional Financing for purposes of the General Conditions, in an amount 

equivalent to one hundred million eight hundred thousand Special Drawing Rights 

(SDR 100,800,000) (“Financing”), to assist in financing the project described in 

Schedule 1 to this Agreement (“Project”). 

2.02. The Recipient may withdraw the proceeds of the Financing in accordance with 
Section III of Schedule 2 to this Agreement.  

2.03. The Maximum Commitment Charge Rate is one-half of one percent (1/2 of 1%) 
per annum on the Unwithdrawn Financing Balance. 

2.04. The Payment Dates are April 15 and October 15 in each year. 

2.05. The Payment Currency is Dollar. 

ARTICLE III — PROJECT 

3.01. The Recipient declares its commitment to the objectives of the Project. To this end, 
the Recipient shall carry out the Project in accordance with the provisions of 

Article V of the General Conditions and Schedule 2 to this Agreement. 

ARTICLE IV — EFFECTIVENESS; TERMINATION 

4.01. The Additional Conditions of Effectiveness consist of the following, namely, that 

the Recipient has prepared, adopted and/or approved the Project Operations 

Manual, in a manner and substance satisfactory to the Association:  



-2- 

 

  

4.02. The Effectiveness Deadline is the date ninety (90) days after the Signature Date. 

4.03. For purposes of Section 10.05 (b) of the General Conditions, the date on which the 

obligations of the Recipient under this Agreement (other than those providing for 

payment obligations) shall terminate is twenty (20) years after the Signature Date. 

ARTICLE V — REPRESENTATIVE; ADDRESSES 

5.01. The Recipient’s Representative is the Recipient’s Minister of Finance. 

5.02. For purposes of Section 11.01 of the General Conditions, the Recipient’s address 

is: 

Ministry of Finance 

Corso Somalo Street  

Shangani District  

Mogadishu, Somalia; and 

5.03. For purposes of Section 11.01 of the General Conditions:  

(a) the Association’s address is: 

 International Development Association 

 1818 H Street, N.W. 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

 United States of America; and 

 (b) the Association’s Electronic Address is: 

 Telex:   Facsimile: 

 248423 (MCI)  1-202-477-6391 

  



-3- 

 

  

AGREED as of the Signature Date. 

   FEDERAL REPULBIC OF SOMALIA 

 

 

 

   By 

 

_____________________________________/s1/ 

Authorized Representative 

 

Name: __________________________/n1/ 

 

Title: __________________________/t1/ 

 

Date: __________________________/d1/ 

 

 

 

   INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 

 

 

 

   By 

 

_____________________________________/s2/ 

Authorized Representative 

 

Name: __________________________/n2/ 

 

Title: __________________________/t2/ 

 

Date: __________________________/d2/ 

 

  

18-May-2020

Country Director

C. Felipe Jaramillo

Minister

14-Jun-2020

Abdirahman Duale Beileh



-4- 

 

  

 

SCHEDULE 1 

 

Project Description 

 

The objective of the Project is to support the recovery of livelihoods and 

infrastructure in Flood and/or Drought Affected Areas and strengthen capacity for disaster 

preparedness nationwide. 

The Project consists of the following parts: 

Component 1: Immediate Basic Services and Livelihood Support  

(a) Establishing a cash-for-work scheme for vulnerable households in Flood and/or 
Drought Affected Areas.  

(b) Controlling the desert locus population through ground and aerial spraying 
operations and carrying related impact assessment and surveillance activities. 

(c) Restoring and protecting farmers’ capacity for agricultural production through the 
provision of inputs, the pro-positioning of feedstock, and the control of vectors and 

vector-borne livestock disease. 

(d) Revitalizing basic health provisions strengthening response services and referral 
pathways for survivors of GBV. 

(e) Supporting household hygiene promotion and treatment.  

Component 2: Medium-Term Flood Recovery 

Rehabilitating critical public and community infrastructure in line with build-back-

better and climate resilient standards, including water and sanitation systems, broken or 

non-functioning pre-existing flood control systems (e.g. embankments, drainage, irrigation 

canals, and restoration of river channels through dredging), health facilities, bridges, and 

small feeder roads, and implementing associated risk mitigation measures such as slope 

protection and environmental rehabilitation. 

Component 3: Longer-Term Disaster Risk Preparedness  

 Strengthening the institutional capacity and preparedness of governmental 

ministries agencies and departments to respond to flood and draught related emergencies 

through, inter alia: (a) piloting integrated flood-drought preparedness and response 

solutions including community level structural and non-structural interventions; 

(b) carrying out flood risk management strengthening enabling policy and institutional 

framework ,flood risk assessment and hazard mapping, and pilot for structural flood risk 



-5- 

 

  

reduction interventions; (c) supporting hydromet and early warning systems for the 

generation and dissemination of hydromet data; (d) operationalizing the National Drought 

Recovery and Resilience Framework Secretariat, institutionalizing investment planning 

processes, aid tracking, inter-institutional coordination and programmatic monitoring and 

evaluation; (e) establishing the National Emergency Operations Center and developing  and 

rolling out public-civil society collaboration models for crisis response and preparedness; 

(f) establishing a locusts early warning system; (g) strengthening the Integrated Disease 

Surveillance and Response System and enhancing laboratory capacity for the timely 

detection of pathogens (including for COVID-19); and (h) rehabilitating, developing and 

equipping selected health facilities for the delivery of essential health services. 

Component 4: Project Management  

 Strengthening the institutional capacity of the Project Implementation Unit and 

State Project Teams for the implementation of the Project including procurement and 

financial management activities and audits, preparation of subproject designs and 

construction supervision, implementation of environmental and social monitoring actions 

and mitigation measures therefor, quality assurance responsibilities, technical management 

and oversight, grievance redressal system (including protection from GBV/SEA and 

incidents referrals), Project monitoring and evaluation (including independent verification 

agents) and reporting requirements.  

Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response  

Provision of immediate response to an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, as needed, 

including: (a) providing health and nutrition services under the Essential Package of Health 

Services; (b) setting up temporary field health facilities; (c) strengthening the Integrated 

Disease Surveillance and Response System to detect pathogens, and the primary health 

systems’ ability to diagnose emergency pathogens; (d) developing an emergency operation 

and response health center; and (e) ensuring and strengthening emergency response 

communications.   



-6- 

 

  

SCHEDULE 2 

Project Execution 

Section I. Implementation Arrangements 

A. Institutional Arrangements.  

1. The Project shall be implemented by the Recipient in coordination with the Federal 
Member States. To this end, the Recipient shall:  

(a) establish by no later than two (2) months after the Effective Date, and 
thereafter maintain throughout Project implementation, a Project steering 

committee (“Project Steering Committee”): (i) chaired by senior staff from 

the Prime Minister’s Office, and comprised of the Director Generals 

and/or Permanent Secretaries of MoF, MoPIED and FMS-MoPIEDs, as 

set forth in the Project Operations Manual; and (ii) vested with such 

powers, functions and competencies, acceptable to the Association and set 

forth in the Project Operations Manual, as shall be required to review and 

approve the investment sub-project and Annual Work Plans and Budgets, 

review quarterly Progress Reports and IVAs’ Project implementation 

assessments, provide strategic decision-making and troubleshooting, and 

ensure smooth federal (Recipient-FMS) inter-coordination and 

cooperation; and  

(b) maintain throughout Project implementation, a Project implementation 
unit (variously the “Project Implementation Unit” or “PIU”): 

(i) established within MoF, co-managed with MoPIED, and led by a 

Project Coordinator assisted by competent, experienced and qualified staff 

from MoF and MoPIED, in sufficient numbers and under terms of 

reference acceptable to the Association, as set forth in the Project 

Operations Manual; and (ii) vested with such powers, financial resources, 

functions and competencies, acceptable to the Association and set forth in 

the Project Operations Manual, as shall be required to: (A) coordinating 

all activities under the Project among all institutional stakeholders and 

liaising with the Association, UN agencies and other development 

partners; (B) carrying out the day-to-day implementation of the Project 

including, procurement and contract management, financial management, 

budgeting and planning, safeguards (ESCP) compliance and monitoring 

including establishing and operating grievance redress mechanism(s), 

quality assurance, communications, awareness and outreach, and audits 

and reporting; and (C) serving as secretariat for the Project Steering 

Committee. 



-7- 

 

  

2. Prior to implementing any activities under the Project in, or for the benefit of, any 
Federal Member State, the Recipient shall cause that Federal Member States to: 

(a) enter into a MoU in accordance with Sub-section I.B (below) of this Schedule; 

and (b) establish within the respective FMS-MoPIED, and thereafter maintain 

throughout the period Project implementation, a state Project team (“State Project 

Team”): (i) headed by a State Project Coordinator assisted by competent, 

experienced and qualified staff, in sufficient numbers and under terms of reference 

acceptable to the Association, as set forth in the Project Operations Manual; and 

(ii) vested with such powers, financial resources, functions and competencies, 

acceptable to the Association and set forth in the Project Operations Manual, as 

shall be required to support the PIU in managing the contract within the respective 

FMS, assist the PIU with the design, compliance review and supervision of civil 

works in the respective FMS, consolidate procurement and work plans of MDAs 

in the respective FMS, manage the local grievance redress mechanisms, ensure 

compliance with the ESCP, the ESSs and applicable safeguard documents; and 

carry out community outreach, awareness raising and consultations, as set further 

elaborated in the Project Operations Manual. 

3. The Recipient shall select and engage: 

(a) by no later than one (1) months after the Effective Date, and thereafter 
maintain for at least the first two (2) years of the Project implementation, 

the project management services of UNOPS, under terms of reference 

acceptable to the Association, to assist the PIU with the day-to-day 

implementation of Component 1 of the Project, including: (i) providing 

guidance and recommendation on technical and policy matters; 

(ii) assisting with the preparation of bidding documents and subsequent 

changes/variations thereof; (iii) assisting with the evaluation of technical 

and financial proposals; (iv) advising on contractual matters and 

procurement disputes, and assist with the establishment of an automated 

contract management system; (v) assessing quality assurance and 

supervision of construction works; (vi) providing training, guidance and 

recommendations to the PIU and the State Project Teams; (vii) ensuring 

compliance with the ESCP; and (viii) preparing Project Reports;  

(b) by not later than one (1) month after the Effective Date, and thereafter 
maintain throughout the period of implementation of Sub-Component 

1.(b) of the Project, the services of one or more service providers and/or 

international organizations, under terms of reference acceptable to the 

Association in order to: (i) provide surveillance to guide locust control 

operations; (ii) procuring bio-pesticides to facilitate ground and aerial 

spraying in and around breeding areas; (iii) conducting impact 

assessments on the effectiveness and safety of control measures; 

(iv) rolling out sensitization campaigns to alert communities of control 

operations and corresponding safeguard measures; and (v) procuring and 



-8- 

 

  

distributing farming and pastoral packages to mitigate the impact of the 

locust infestation on affected vulnerable rural households; 

(c) by not later than three (3) months after the Effective Date, and thereafter 
maintain throughout the period of implementation of Project, the services 

of one or more independent verification/audit agency/ies (“IVA(s)”) or 

consultant(s), with qualification and experience and under terms of 

reference acceptable to the Association, to carry out qualitative and 

quantitative assessments on Project impacts and implementation progress 

(including stakeholders/beneficiaries’ surveys), and prepare and submit 

bi-annual reports with its/their conclusions and observations to the Project 

Steering Committee and the Association; and  

(d) prior to carrying out any sub-activities under items (g) and (h) of 
Component 3 of the Project, and thereafter throughout the period of 

implementation of such activities, the services of one or more service 

providers and/or international organizations (the “Covid-19 Response 

Consultant(s)”), under terms of reference acceptable to the Association, to 

be primarily responsible for the implementation of any activities 

thereunder, unless the Association otherwise agree on the basis of the 

capacity of the proposed leading MDAs. 

B. Memorandum of Understanding  

1. For purposes of carrying out the Project, and prior to the provision any funds and/or 

the financing of any activities implemented under the Project in/for any Federal 

Member State, the Recipient shall have entered into a memorandum of 

understanding with such Federal Member State (variously the “Memorandum of 

Understanding” or “MoU”), under terms and conditions acceptable to the 

Association, setting forth the obligations and responsibilities of the parties thereto 

(i.e. the Recipient and the signing FMS) in the implementation of the Project, in 

consistency with this Agreement, the ESCP and the Project Operations Manual.    

2. The Recipient shall exercise its right under the pertinent MoU (s) in such manner 

as to protect the interests of the Recipient and the Association and to accomplish 

the purposes of the Financing.   

3. The Recipient shall not assign, amend, abrogate, or waive, or permit to be assigned, 

amended, abrogated, or waived, whether in whole or in part, any of the terms the 

MoU, without the prior written consent of the Association. 

4. Further to the provisions of paragraph 1 and 2 above in this Sub-section I.B of this 

Schedule, and for avoidance of any doubts, the Recipient shall ensure that no funds 

shall be transferred, advanced, or paid out of the Financing for activities 

implemented in relation to, or for the benefit of, any particular FMS, until and 



-9- 

 

  

unless such FMS has duly entered into a MoU to that end. Any funds so transferred, 

advanced and/or paid, shall be deemed ineligible for financing under this 

Financing.   

5. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of any MoU and those of this 

Agreement, the latter shall prevail. 

C. Operations Manual 

1. The Recipient shall prepare and adopt a Project operations manual (“Project 
Operations Manual”) in a manner and substance satisfactory to the Association, 

and shall thereafter implement the Project, and cause the FMS to carry out their 

respective responsibilities under the Project, in accordance therewith; which 

manual shall set forth, inter alia: (a) the detailed description of activities and the 

respective implementation arrangements and modalities, including the setup and 

job descriptions/terms of reference and allocation of functions and responsibilities, 

reporting lines and accountabilities across MDAs and the various implementation 

units to be established as per Section I.A of this Schedule; (b) all necessary inter-

institutional coordination arrangements for the Project, including allocation 

decision-making powers the various implementation units; (c) the procedures for 

the preparation and approval of the Annual Work Plans and Budgets; (d) the 

project procurement arrangements; (e) the prioritization criteria for the selection 

of investment activities and interventions and/or, when applicable, the eligibility 

of beneficiaries; (f) the financial management requirements including detailed 

arrangements and procedures for financial approvals hierarchies and segregation 

of duties; management of bank accounts and payment processes; management and 

accounting of assets, and preparation of internal audits and annual Financial 

Statements, including the terms of reference for the external auditor; (g) the 

mechanics of community engagement by State Project Teams; (h) the 

environmental and safeguards procedures, including details of the grievance 

redress mechanism and GBV Action Plan, disclosure and reporting; and (i) the 

Project monitoring and evaluation, and reporting requirements. 

2. The Recipient shall refrain, and cause the FMS to refrain, from materially and/or 
substantially amending, revising, waiving, voiding, suspending or abrogating, any 

provision of the Project Operations Manual, whether in whole or in part, without 

the prior written concurrence of the Association.  

3. In the event of any inconsistency between a provision of the Project Operations 
Manual and those of this Agreement, the provisions of this Agreement shall 

prevail.  

  



-10- 

 

  

D. Annual Work Plans and Budgets  

The Recipient, through its PIU and with the assistance of the State Project Teams, 

shall: 

(a) prepare and furnish to the Association on an annual basis, by no later than 
June 15th of each year, commencing on June 15th, 2021, the annual work 

plan and budget for the Project (the “Annual Work Plan and Budget”), 

covering the activities proposed for the next following Fiscal Year of 

Project implementation; which plan and budget shall be of such scope and 

detail as set forth in the Project Operations Manual and/or as the 

Association shall reasonably request. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the 

Annual Work Plan and Budget for the first year of Project implementation 

shall be prepared by the Recipient by not later than July 15th, 2020;  

(b) immediately thereafter, submit through the PIU to the Project Steering 
Committee for review and approval within forty-five (45) days each such 

Annual Work Plan and Budget, jointly with the Association’s comments 

thereon; and  

(c) finally, ensure that the Project is carried out in accordance with the Annual 
Work Plans and Budgets as agreed with the Association and approved by 

the Project Steering Committee. 

E. Environmental and Social Standards. 

1. The Recipient shall ensure, and shall cause the Federal Member States to ensure, 

that the Project is carried out in accordance with the Environmental and Social 

Standards, in a manner acceptable to the Association. 

2. Without limitation upon paragraph 1 above, the Recipient shall ensure, and cause 

the Federal Member States to ensure, that the Project is implemented in accordance 

with the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (“ESCP”), in a manner 

acceptable to the Association. To this end, the Recipient shall ensure that:  

(a) the measures and actions specified in the ESCP are implemented with due 
diligence and efficiency, and provided in the ESCP; 

(b) sufficient funds are available to cover the costs of implementing the ESCP; 

(c) policies and procedures are maintained, and qualified and experienced 
staff in adequate numbers are retained to implement the ESCP, as provided 

in the ESCP; and 

(d) the ESCP, or any provision thereof, is not amended, repealed, suspended 
or waived, except as the Association shall otherwise agree in writing, as 



-11- 

 

  

specified in the ESCP, and ensure that the revised ESCP is disclosed 

promptly thereafter. 

3. In case of any inconsistencies between the ESCP and the provisions of this 
Agreement, the provisions of this Agreement shall prevail.   

4. The Recipient shall ensure, and cause the Federal Member States to ensure, that: 

(a) all measures necessary are taken to collect, compile, and furnish to the 
Association through regular reports, with the frequency specified in the 

ESCP, and promptly in a separate report or reports, if so requested by the 

Association, information on the status of compliance with the ESCP and 

the environmental and social instruments referred to therein, all such 

reports in form and substance acceptable to the Association, setting out, 

inter alia: (i) the status of implementation of the ESCP; (ii) conditions, if 

any, which interfere or threaten to interfere with the implementation of the 

ESCP; and (iii) corrective and preventive measures taken or required to be 

taken to address such conditions; and 

(b) the Association is promptly notified of any incident or accident related to 
or having an impact on the Project which has, or is likely to have, a 

significant adverse effect on the environment, the affected communities, 

the public or workers, in accordance with the ESCP, the environmental 

and social instruments referenced therein and the Environmental and 

Social Standards.  

5. The Recipient shall, and shall cause the FMS to, establish, publicize, maintain and 
operate accessible grievance mechanisms, to receive and facilitate resolution of 

concerns and grievances of Project-affected people, and take all measures 

necessary and appropriate to resolve, or facilitate the resolution of, such concerns 

and grievances, in a manner acceptable to the Association. 

6. The Recipient shall ensure that all bidding documents and contracts for civil works 

under the Project include the obligation of contractors, subcontractors and 

supervising entities to: (a) comply with the relevant aspects of ESCP and the 

environmental and social instruments referred to therein; and (b) adopt and enforce 

codes of conduct that should be provided to and signed by all workers, detailing 

measures to address environmental, social, health and safety risks, and the risks of 

sexual exploitation and abuse, sexual harassment and violence against children, all 

as applicable to such civil works commissioned or carried out pursuant to said 

contracts. 

 

 



-12- 

 

  

F. Contingency Emergency Response 

1. In order to ensure proper implementation of the Component 5 of the Project (“CER 
Component”), the Recipient shall: 

(a) prepare and furnish to the Association for its review and approval, an 
operations manual (“CER Manual”) which shall set forth detailed 

implementation arrangements for the CER Component, including: (i) the  

designation of, terms of reference for, and resource allocation to, the 

entity/ies to be responsible for the coordination and implementation of the 

CER Component (the “Coordinating Authority”); (ii) specific activities 

which may be included in the CER Component, Eligible Expenditures 

required therefor (“Emergency Expenditures”), and any procedures for 

such inclusion; (iii) financial management arrangements for the CER 

Component; (iv) procurement methods and procedures for the Emergency 

Response to be financed under the CER Component; (v) documentation 

required for withdrawals of Emergency Expenditures; (vi) environmental 

and social safeguard management arrangements and instruments for the 

CER Component, including management frameworks, assessments and/or 

plans consistent with the Association’s Environmental and Social 

Standards and other policies on the matter; and (vii) any other 

arrangements necessary to ensure proper coordination and implementation 

of the CER Component;  

(b) afford the Association a reasonable opportunity to review the proposed 
CER manual;  

(c) promptly adopt the CER Manual for the CER Component as shall have 
been approved/accepted by the Association;  

(d) ensure that the CER Component is carried out in accordance with the CER 
Manual; provided, however that, in the event of any inconsistency between 

the provisions of the CER Manual and those of this Agreement, the 

provisions of this Agreement shall prevail; and 

(e) refrain from amending, suspending, abrogating, repealing or waiving, 
whether in whole or in part, any provision of the CER Manual without 

prior approval by the Association. 

2. The Recipient shall, throughout the implementation of the CER Component, 
maintain the Coordinating Authority, with adequate staff and resources 

satisfactory to the Association.  

3. The Recipient shall undertake no activities under the CER Component unless and 
until the following conditions have been met in respect of said activities:  



-13- 

 

  

(a) (i) the Recipient has determined that an Eligible Crisis or Emergency has 
occurred; (ii) has furnished to the Association a request to include said 

activities in the CER Component in order to respond to said Eligible Crisis 

or Emergency; and (iii) the Association has agreed with such 

determination, accepted said request and notified the Recipient thereof; 

and 

(b) (i) the Recipient has ensured the preparation and disclosure of all 
safeguards instruments as may be required for said activities, in 

accordance with the CER Manual; (ii) the Association has approved all 

said instruments; and (iii) the Recipient has ensured implementation of any 

actions which are required to be taken under said instruments prior to the 

commencement of such activities. 

4. Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary in this Section, Emergency 
Expenditures required for activities included in the CER Component shall be 

procured in accordance with the procurement methods and procedures set forth in 

the CER Manual and in consistency with the Procurement Regulations. 

Section II. Project Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation  

 The Recipient shall furnish to the Association each Project Report not later than 

forty-five (45) days after the end of each calendar quarter, covering the calendar 

quarter. 

 

Section III. Withdrawal of the Proceeds of the Financing 

 

A. General 

Without limitation upon the provisions of Article II of the General Conditions and 

in accordance with the Disbursement and Financial Information Letter, the 

Recipient may withdraw the proceeds of the Financing to finance Eligible 

Expenditures; in the amount allocated and, if applicable, up to the percentage set 

forth against each Category of the following table: 

Category 

Amount of the 

Grant Allocated  

(expressed in SDR) 

Percentage of 

Expenditures to be 

Financed 

(inclusive of Taxes) 

(1) Goods, works, non-consulting 
services, consulting services, 

Incremental Operating Costs, 

Workshops and Training for 

52,800,000  100% 



-14- 

 

  

Category 

Amount of the 

Grant Allocated  

(expressed in SDR) 

Percentage of 

Expenditures to be 

Financed 

(inclusive of Taxes) 

Components 1 and 2 of the 

Project. 

(2) Goods, works, non-consulting 
services, consulting services, 

Incremental Operating Costs, 

Workshops and Training for 

Component 3 (except for sub-

activities 3(g) and 3(h)) and 

Component 4 of the Project. 

20,500,000 100% 

(3) Goods, works, non-consulting 
services, consulting services for 

sub-activities under Component 

3.(g) and 3.(h) of the Project 

12,500,000 100% 

(4) Emergency Expenditures  15,000,000 100% 

TOTAL AMOUNT 100,800,000  

 

B. Withdrawal Conditions; Withdrawal Period 

1. Notwithstanding the provisions of Part A above, no withdrawal shall be made: 

(a) for payments made prior to the Signature Date, except that withdrawals up 

to an aggregate amount not to exceed SDR40,320,000 may be made for 

payments made prior to this date but: (i) on or after November 1, 2019 for 

the financing of Eligible Expenditures under Categories (1); and (ii) on or 

after January 1, 2020 for the financing Eligible Expenditures under 

Category (4) above; or 

(b) under Category (1), until and unless the Recipient has 

(i) hired and appointed in the PIU environmental and social 

specialists, with qualification and experience acceptable to the 

Association, and mobilized additional technical resources, 

pursuant to the ESCP; 

(ii) entered into a MoU with at least one (1) Federal Member State 

comprising Flood and/or Drought Affected Areas; and  



-15- 

 

  

(iii) prepared and adopted the Environmental and Social Management 

Framework, the Pest Management Plan, an updated Stakeholder 

Engagement Plans, the GBV Action Plan, the Security 

Management Plan and the Labor Management Procedures; or 

(c) under Category (2), until and unless, the Recipient has prepared and 
adopted the: (i) Environmental and Social Management Framework; 

(ii) the Security Management Plan; and (iii) the Labor Management 

Procedures; or 

(d) under Category (3), until and unless the Recipient has: 

(i) furnished to the Association for review, comments and 
concurrence a work plan with detail activities and applicable 

implementation arrangements satisfactory to the Association, for 

sub-activities (g) and (h) in Component 3 of the Project; 

(ii) updated the Environmental and Social Management Framework, 
the Stakeholder Engagement Plans, the Security Management 

Plan and the Labor Management Procedures, as deemed necessary 

by the Association, as well as the Procedures for Health/Medical 

Waste Management satisfactory to the Association, for the 

implementation of such work plan; and 

(iii) hired the Covid-19 Response Consultant(s), as required by the 
Association. 

(e) under Category (4), until and unless the Association is satisfied, and has 
notified the Recipient of its satisfaction, that all of the following conditions 

have been met: 

 (i) the Recipient has determined that an Eligible Crisis or Emergency 

has occurred, has furnished to the Association a request to include 

certain activities in the CER Component in order to respond to 

said Eligible Crisis or Emergency, and the Association has agreed 

with such determination, accepted said request, and notified the 

Recipient thereof; 

 (ii) the Recipient has ensured that all safeguard instruments required 

for the said activities have been prepared and disclosed, in a 

manner and substance acceptable to the Association, and the 

Recipient has ensured that any actions which are required to be 

taken under said instruments have been implemented, all in 

accordance with the provisions of Section I.F.3(b) of this 

Schedule; 



-16- 

 

  

 (iii) the Recipient has provided sufficient evidence satisfactory to the 

Association, that the Coordinating Authority has adequate staff 

and resources in accordance with the provision of Section I.F.2 of 

this Schedule, for the purposes of said activities; and 

(iv) the Recipient has adopted a CER Manual in form, substance and 

manner acceptable to the Association, and the provisions of the 

CER Manual remain or have been updated in accordance with the 

provisions of Section I.F.1 of this Schedule so as to be appropriate 

for the inclusion and implementation of the CER Component. 

2. The Closing Date is May 31, 2024.



 

APPENDIX 

Definitions 

1. “Annual Work Plan and Budget” means the yearly work plans and budgets to be 
prepared, approved and implemented by the Recipient pursuant to Section I.D of 

Schedule 2 to this Agreement as further elaborated in the Project Operations 

Manual. 

2. “Anti-Corruption Guidelines” means, for purposes of paragraph 5 of the Appendix 
to the General Conditions, the “Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud 

and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants”, 

dated October 15, 2006 and revised in January 2011 and as of July 1, 2016. 

3. “Category” means a category set forth in the table in Section III.A of Schedule 2 
to this Agreement. 

4. “CER Component” means Component 5 of the Project, as described in Schedule 1 
to this Agreement. 

5. “CER Manual” means the immediate response mechanism operations manuals 
referred to in Section I.F.1 of Schedule 2 to this Agreement, acceptable to the 

Association, to be adopted by the Recipient for the implementation of the CER 

Component, in accordance with the provision of said Section.  

6. “Component” means each of the clustered Project activities grouped under the 
titles: “Component 1: Immediate Basic Services and Livelihood Support”; 

“Component 2: Medium-Term Flood Recovery”; “Component 3: Longer-Term 

Disaster Risk Preparedness”; “Component 4: Project Management”; and 

“Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response” in the Project description in 

Schedule 1 to this Agreement. 

7. “Coordinating Authority” means the entity or entities designated by the Recipient 
in the CER Manual, and approved by the Association, pursuant to Sections I.F.1 

and I.F.2 of Schedule 2 to this Agreement, which entity/ies shall be responsible for 

coordinating the implementation of the CER Component. 

8. “Covid-19 Response Consultant(s)” means the service provider(s) and/or 
international organization(s) to be hired pursuant to Section I.A.3.(d) of Schedule 

2 to this Agreement.  

9. “Eligible Crisis and Emergency” means an event, associated with a natural or man-
made crisis or disaster, that has caused, or is likely to imminently cause, a major 

adverse economic and/or social impact to the Recipient. 



-2- 

 

  

10. “Emergency Expenditures” means any of the eligible expenditures set forth in the 
CER Manual, in accordance with the provision of Section I.F.1 of Schedule 2 to 

this Agreement and required for the activities described in such manual to be 

financed under the CER Component. 

11. “Environmental and Social Commitment Plan” or “ESCP” means the  
environmental and social commitment plan for the Project, dated April 16, 2020, 

as the same may be amended from time to time in accordance with the provisions 

thereof, which sets out the material measures and actions that the Recipient shall 

carry out or cause to be carried out to address the potential environmental and 

social risks and impacts of the Project, including the timeframes of the actions and 

measures, institutional, staffing, training, monitoring and reporting arrangements, 

and any environmental and social instruments to be prepared thereunder. 

12. “Environmental and Social Management Framework” means the environmental 
and social framework to be prepared and adopted by the Recipients in a manner 

and substance satisfactory to the Association pursuant to the ESCP, and to be 

disclosed in-country, and at the Association’s website, setting out the modalities 

to be followed in assessing the potential adverse environmental and social impacts 

of Project activities in accordance with the ESSs, including impacts on natural 

habitat, forests, and physical cultural resources, pest management, and risks of 

gender-based violence and sexual exploitation and abuse and the measures to be 

taken to offset, reduce or mitigate such adverse impacts, including measures that 

endeavor to prevent and respond to GBV and SEA, occupational, health and safety 

(OHS) measures, protocols for managing waste and hazardous materials; as well 

as procedures for the preparation of site-/activity-specific environmental and social 

management plans, as such framework may be amended by the Recipient from 

time to time, with the prior written concurrence of the Association. 

13. “Environmental and Social Standards” or “ESSs” means, collectively: 
(i) “Environmental and Social Standard 1: Assessment and Management of 

Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts”; (ii) “Environmental and Social 

Standard 2: Labor and Working Conditions”; (iii) “Environmental and Social 

Standard 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management”; 

(iv) “Environmental and Social Standard 4: Community Health and Safety”; 

(v) “Environmental and Social Standard 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land 

Use and Involuntary Resettlement”; (vi) “Environmental and Social Standard 6: 

Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural 

Resources”; (vii) “Environmental and Social Standard 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-

Saharan Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities”; 

(viii) “Environmental and Social Standard 8: Cultural Heritage”; 

(ix) “Environmental and Social Standard 9: Financial Intermediaries”; 

(x) “Environmental and Social Standard 10: Stakeholder Engagement and 

Information Disclosure”; effective on October 1, 2018, as published by the 

Association. 



-3- 

 

  

14. “Essential Package of Health Services” means a standard set of outreach, health 
promotion, and referral services emphasizing maternal, newborn, and child health 

and sexual reproductive health-based on World Health Organization standards. 

15. “FAO” means the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, established 
on October 16, 1945. 

16. “Federal Member State” and the acronym “FMS” mean each of the states 
constituting the Somali federation, as acknowledge in the Recipient’s Provisional 

Constitution (2012). 

17. “Fiscal Year” means the Recipient’s fiscal year commencing on January 1 of each 
calendar year and finishing on December 31 of the same calendar year. 

18. “FMS-MoPIED” means, individually, each of the FMS’s Ministries of Planning 
Investment and Economic Development, and/or any successors to them.  

19. “Flood and/or Draught Affected Areas” means: (a) the areas impacted/damaged by 
riverine and flash flooding from the 2019 Deyr rains as identified in the Flood 

Impact Needs Assessment; and (b) the areas impacted by drought and dry 

conditions, such as the 2016-2017 drought, poor 2018 Deyr rains, dry conditions 

during the 2019 Jilaal season, below-average, and erratic 2019 Gu’ rains. 

20. “Flood Impact Needs Assessment” means the assessment published on February 
2020, prepared under the overall leadership of the Prime Minister’s Office in 

partnership with the Recipient’s Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs and Disaster 

Management and with strategic support from development partners (including the 

Association), which quantifies damages, losses, and needs across multiple sectors 

and in arears affected by the riverine and flash flooding from the 2019 Deyr rains. 

21. “GBV” means gender-based violence.  

22. “GBV Action Plan” refers to the action plan to be prepared by the Recipient, in a 
manner and substance satisfactory to the Association pursuant to the ESCP, and to 

be disclosed on the Association’s website, setting out the precautionary measures 

to be set in place to mitigate and/or address any project-related incident of sexual 

exploitation and abuse, sexual harassment and other forms of gender based 

violence, as well as considerations related to child protection, as said instrument 

may be updated from time to time with the prior written concurrence of the 

Association.  

23. “General Conditions” means the “International Development Association General 
Conditions for IDA Financing, Investment Project Financing”, dated December 

14, 2018. 



-4- 

 

  

24. “Incremental Operating Costs” means the reasonable incremental expenses incurred 
on account of Project implementation, including office equipment and supplies, 

vehicle operation and maintenance, maintenance small office works and 

maintenance, of equipment, communication, advertisement and insurance costs, 

office administration costs, bank charges, translation costs, utilities, rental, 

consumables, salaries, accommodation, travel and per diem of Project staff, 

excluding the salaries of the Recipient’s and the FMS’ civil service. 

25. “Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response System” means a system to be 
established by the Recipient at federal to harmonized and coordinate disease 

surveillance activities in a country as a common public service.  

26. “IVA(s)” means, collectively, the independent verification/audit agency/ies 
(firm(s) or organization(s)) to be hired pursuant to Section I.A.3.(c) of Schedule 2 

to this Agreement. 

27. “Labor Management Procedures” means the labor management procedures to be 
prepared by the Recipient as part of the Environmental Management Framework, 

in a manner and substance satisfactory to the Association pursuant to the ESCP, 

and to be disclosed on the Association’s website, setting out the Project’s approach 

and requirements to labor in meeting national requirements as well as the 

objectives of ESS #2 (on labor and working conditions and ESS #4 (on community 

health and safety), including procedures on incident investigation and reporting, 

recording and reporting of non-compliance, emergency preparedness and response 

procedures, protection of project workers from discrimination, forced labor and 

child labor, occupational health and safety (OHS), codes of conducts and 

continuous training and awareness for workers, as said instrument may be updated 

from time to time with the prior written concurrence of the Association. 

28. “MDAs” means the ministries, departments and public agencies of the Recipient 
and/or the Federal Member States. 

29.  “Memorandum of Understanding” and “MoU” mean each of the agreements to be 
entered into between the Recipient and a FMS, implementing and/or benefiting 

from Project activities, pursuant to the provisions of Section I.B.1 of Schedule 2 

to this Agreement and in conformity with the provisions of the Project Operations 

Manual. 

30. “MoF” means the Recipient’s Ministry of Finance, and/or any successor to it, 
acceptable to the Association. 

31. “MoPIED” means the Recipient’s Ministry of Planning, Investment and Economic 
Development, and/or any successor to it, acceptable to the Association. 



-5- 

 

  

32. “National Drought Recovery and Resilience Framework Secretariat” means the 
steering group to be established within MoPIED, for the purpose of supporting the 

operationalization of a government-led recovery and resilience framework, and 

responsible, inter alia, for strengthening aid coordination, monitoring recovery and 

resilience-related outcomes. 

33. “National Emergency Operations Center” means an inter-ministerial facility to be 
established within the inter-agency National Emergency Operations Center 

Steering Committee under the aegis of the Prime Minister’s Office, within a 

mandate to lead the establishment and operationalization of a civic protection 

center for coordination and management of emergencies.  

34. “Pest Management Plan” means the pest management plan to be prepared by the 
Recipient, in a manner and substance satisfactory to the Association pursuant to 

the ESCP, and to be disclosed on the Association’s website, setting out the 

measures modalities, pesticide products, policy, regulatory framework, 

institutional capacity, monitoring and evaluation, and application/spraying 
protocols admissible under the Project, as well as any measures to be 

taken/followed to offset, reduce or mitigate any potential harms to people’s health, 

their livelihoods and/or their environments in accordance with the ESSs, as said 

instrument may be updated from time to time with the prior written concurrence 

of the Association. 

35. “Prime Minister’s Office” means the office of the Recipient’s Prime Minister. 

36. “Procedures for Health/Medical Waste Management” means the health and 
medical waste management procedures to be prepared by the Recipient as part of 

the Environmental Management Framework, in a manner and substance 

satisfactory to the Association, pursuant to the ESCP, and to be disclosed on the 

Association’s website, setting out the protocols for the management of 

medical  wastes in a safe manner (including advocacy measures for good practices 

occupational, health and safety measures with emergency preparedness and 

response procedures) to be used by health, sanitary and cleaning workers 

associated with the Project in order to prevent the spread of infection and reduce 

the exposure of health workers, patients and the public to the risks from medical 

wastes and associated pathogens; as said instrument may be updated from time to 

time with the prior written concurrence of the Association. 

37. “Procurement Regulations” means, for purposes of paragraph 87 of the Appendix 
to the General Conditions, the “World Bank Procurement Regulations for IPF 

Borrowers”, dated July 2016, revised November 2017 and August 2018. 

38. “Project Implementation Unit” and the acronym “PIU” mean the Project 
implementation unit established by the Recipient within MoF and referred to in 

Section I.A.1(b) of Schedule 2 to this Agreement. 



-6- 

 

  

39. “Project Operations Manual” means the operations manual for the Project to be 
prepared and adopted by the Recipient as a condition precedent to the effectiveness 

of this Agreement, pursuant to Section I.C.1 of Schedule 2 to this Agreement, as 

the same may be amended from time to time with the prior written concurrence of 

the Association.  

40. “Project Steering Committee” means the steering committee to be established by 
the Recipient pursuant to Section I.A.1(a) of Schedule 2 to this Agreement and in 

conformity with the provision of the Project Operations Manual. 

41. “SEA” means sexual exploitation and abuse.  

42. “Security Management Plan” means the security management plan to be prepared 
by the Recipient, in a manner and substance satisfactory to the Association 

pursuant to the ESCP, and to be disclosed on the Association’s website, setting out 

the security guidelines, protocols and principles, to safeguard the lives and 

properties of individuals and communities involved in, affected by or benefiting 

from, the Project, as well as the assets created/acquired thereunder, all in 

accordance with the requirements of the ESSs, as said instrument may be updated 

from time to time with the prior written concurrence of the Association. 

43. “Signature Date” means the later of the two dates on which the Recipient and the 
Association signed this Agreement and such definition applies to all references to 

“the date of the Financing Agreement” in the General Conditions. 

44. “Stakeholder Engagement Plan” means the stakeholder engagement plan dated 
April 22, 2020, prepared by the Recipient, in a manner and substance satisfactory 

to the Association, and disclosed on the Association’s website, as the same shall 

be further updated after stakeholders consultations and prior to Project 

disbursements as set forth in the ESCP, which plan sets out the mechanisms for 

identifying stakeholders, gauging their interests and providing them and their 

communities with systematic means and processes for inclusive and meaningful 

engagement to influence Project design and implementation, including a grievance 

redress mechanism, as said instrument may be updated from time to time with the 

prior written concurrence of the Association. 

45. “State Project Team” means each of the state teams to be established by the 
respective FMS within each of their FMS-MoPIEDs, pursuant to Section I.A.2.(b) 

of Schedule 2 to this Agreement and in conformity with the provisions of the 

Project Operations Manual.  

46. “Sub-Component” means each of the clustered Project activities singled out in the 
paragraphs (a) through (e) of Component 1 of the Project, individually considered. 

47. “UN” means the United Nations. 



-7- 

 

  

48. “UNOPS” means the United Nations Office for Project Services, established 
pursuant to the UN General Assembly decision 48/501 of September 19, 1994. 

49. “Workshop and Training” means the reasonable costs of training, workshops and 
conferences conducted in the territory of the Recipient, or, subject to prior approval 

by the Association, attended abroad by the Recipient’s and the FMS’s officials and 

staff in connection with the Project, including the purchase and publication of 

materials, rental of facilities, course fees and travel and subsistence of trainees. 


		2020-06-15T06:59:11-0700
	Digitally verifiable PDF exported from www.docusign.com