RP1740 REV
Public Disclosure Authorized
PEOPLE
OF
OF COD WE ASPIRE, BUILD AND ADVANCE
GOVERNMENT OF GRENADA
DISASTER VULNERABILITY REDUCTION PROJECT
Public Disclosure Authorized
RESETTLEMENT
POLICY
FRAMEWORK (RPF)
April 2011
Updated February 2015 (Additional Financing)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
List of Acronyms / Abbreviations
4
List of Tables
4
List of Relevant Legislations
4
RPF POLICY OBJECTIVES
5
1. GENERAL BACKGROUND
6
1.1. Description of Original Project
6
1.2. Detailed Description of Modified or New Project Activities
9
Component 1 Prevention and Adaptation Investment
11
Component 2 Regional Platform for Hazard and Risk Evaluation and
Application for Improved Decision Making
14
Component 4 Project Management and Implementation Support
15
1.3. Rational of the Preparation of the Resettlement Framework
16
1.4. Objectives for the Resettlement Framework
16
1.5 Adverse Social Impacts
16
2. INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
17
2.1. Project Organizational Framework
17
2.2. Resettlement Planning Principles and Process
18
3. LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR COMPENSATION
18
3.1. Compensation Laws
18
3.2. MOF/PCU Strategy for Expropriation and Compensation
24
3.3. World Bank Procedures for Resettlement/Rehabilitation (OP 4.12)
25
4. ORGANIZATIONAL PROCEDURES
25
4.1. Implementation Process
25
4.2. Grievance Redress Mechanism
26
4.3. Grievance Appeal Committee Role
28
4.4. Arrangements for Funding
29
5. OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES
29
5.1. Institutional Framework
29
5.2. Project Launching
29
2
6. SOCIO-ECONOMIC BACKGROUND OF PAPS
30
6.1. Identification of PAPs
30
6.2. Social Impacts of the DVRP
31
7. METHODS OF VALUING AFFECTED ASSETS
31
7.1. Organizational Procedures for Delivery of Entitlements
31
7.2. Method and Basis of Valuation
32
7.3. Compensation Procedures and Civil Work Schedule
34
8. SOURCES OF FUNDING
35
9. CONSULTATION AND PARTICIPATION PROCESS
35
9.1. Data Collection Phase
35
9.2. Planning Phase
36
9.3. Implementation / Execution Phase
36
9.4. Monitoring and Evaluation Phase
36
10. MONITORING AND EVALUATION ARRANGEMENTS
37
10.1. Monitoring Principles
37
10.2. External Monitoring and Evaluation
38
ANNEXES
1 Grievance Redress Form
39
2 Impacts Covered and Required Measures for Compensating Resettled Persons 40
3
LIST OF ACRONYMS / ABBREVIATIONS
AF - Additional Financing
DVRP - Disaster Vulnerability Reduction Project
MOEHRD - Ministry of Education and Human Resource Development
MOF - Ministry of Finance
MOHLCD - Ministry of Housing, Lands and Community Development
MOW - Ministry of Works
PAP - Project Affected Person
PCU - Project Coordinating Unit
PSC - Project Steering Committee
RPF - Resettlement Policy Framework
SA - Social Assessment
WB - World Bank
LIST OF TABLES
1. Table 1: Project Sites Possibly Triggering OP/BP 4.12 by Category and Numbers Affected
LIST OF RELEVANT LEGISLATIONS
1. Land Acquisition Act (CAP 159): An Act to authorize the acquisition of land for public
purposes [6ᵗʰ October 1945]
2. Land Settlement Act (CAP 161): An Act to provide for the establishment and location of
small holdings and for other purposes [30th December 1933]
3. Crown Lands Act (CAP 73): An Act relating to Crown Lands [2ⁿᵈ November, 1896]
4
RESETTLEMENT POLICY FRAMEWORK (RPF)
Government of Grenada/World Bank Disaster Vulnerability Reduction Project (WB-GOG DVRP)
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) - Rationale
This Resettlement Policy Famework is an instrument which derives from the World Bank's Involuntary
Resettlement Policy (OP 4.12). OP 4.12 and covers direct economic and social impacts that both result
from Bank-assisted investment projects and are caused by:
(a) the involuntary taking of land resulting in
(i)
relocation or loss of shelter;
(ii)
loss of assets or access to assets; or
(iii)
loss of income sources or means of livelihood, whether or not the affected
persons must move to another location; or
(b) The involuntary restriction of access to legally designated parks and protected areas resulting in
adverse impacts on the livelihoods of the displaced persons.
During project preparation of the Regional Disaster Vulnerability Project (RDVRP) it was determined
that proposed project activities would likely lead to the involuntary acquisition of land. As a result the
Involuntary Resettlement Safeguard was triggered and an RPF prepared. The original RPF was disclosed
in April 2011 prior to the appraisal of the DVRP.
This updated document reflects an Additional Financing (AF) of 8.80 (USD Million). The AF would
permit the completion of priority investments for flood protection and improved drainage in urban areas
begun under the DVRP and the project development objectives (PDO) of the AF remain the same as the
original DVRP project. As such this RPF is valid for all activities under this project both original DVRP
investments as well as those under the additional financing
Resettlement Policy Framework Policy Objectives
1. Involuntary resettlement may cause severe long-term hardship, impoverishment, and
environmental damage unless appropriate measures are carefully planned and carried
out. For these reasons, the overall objectives of the Bank's (OP/4.12 policy on
involuntary resettlement is the following:
(a) Involuntary resettlement should be avoided where feasible, or minimized, exploring
all viable alternative project designs.
(b) Where it is not feasible to avoid resettlement, resettlement activities should be
conceived and executed as sustainable development programs, providing sufficient
investment resources to enable the persons displaced by the project to share in
1 Involuntary means "actions that may be taken without the displaced person's informed consent or power of choice"
5
project benefits. Displaced persons² should be meaningfully consulted and should
have opportunities to participate in planning and implementing resettlement
programs.
(c) Displaced persons should be assisted in their efforts to improve their livelihoods and
standards of living or at least to restore them, in real terms, to pre-displacement
levels or to levels prevailing prior to the beginning of project implementation,
whichever is higher.
2. This policy applies to all components of the project that result in involuntary
resettlement, regardless of the source of financing. It also applies to other activities
resulting in involuntary resettlement that in the judgment of the Bank are (a) directly
and significantly related to the Bank-assisted project, (b) necessary to achieve its
objectives as set forth in the project documents; and (c) carried out, or planned to be
carried out, contemporaneously with the project.
1. GENERAL BACKGROUND
Grenada is among the most disaster-prone countries in the world, regularly suffering disasters related to
natural events such as hurricanes (Ivan 2004 and Emily 2005 being particularly devastating), landslides,
rain and drought. These hazards have caused significant and recurrent damages to national infrastructure
including housing, road networks, schools, hospitals and other facilities such as phone lines, water and
electricity. The resulting impacts significantly affect human welfare, national economic activities,
property, and natural resources.
1.1. Description of Original Project: Grenada Disaster Vulnerability Reduction Project (2011)
The project aims to reduce vulnerability of human and physical assets to natural hazards. It entails a
range of civil works which would consist of new construction and rehabilitation of existing infrastructure
in order to reduce their vulnerability to natural hazards and climate change. The investments include a
suite of civil works activities designed to improve resilience to disaster events and adapt to impacts
relating to climate change
The original Project consists of four (4) Components:
Component 1 - Prevention and Adaptation Investments. This component includes a broad set of
investments, such as drainage improvement measures, improved water storage capacity, risk reduction,
rehabilitation of critical infrastructure bridges, and some roads), retrofitting of critical public buildings
(including schools and health centres), investments in satellite emergency centres, etc. Civil works will be
built to internationally recognized standards for hazard and climate resilience.
2. The term "displaced persons" refers to persons who are affected in any of the ways described in Para 3 of
Appendix 2. Also, see appendix 2 for meaning of "social impacts", "investment projects", "taking of land",
"involuntary restriction of access" among other key terms, concepts and statements
6
For the purpose of the RFP this component focuses on eight (8) sub-components as described above such
as Rock Falls, Land Slips and Flooding and how natural weather phenomenon such as prolonged rainfall,
harsh dry seasons or hurricanes induce occurrence of these hazards and their potential devastating effects
on human and physical assets.
(i) Water Security: severe water storage capacity limitations exist and affect significant
populations in the capital city of the town of St. George's, South East St. George and the rural
town of Victoria especially during harsh 'dry seasons'. This results in drought-like conditions
which causes water sources to run low, hence water shortage; and in 'rain season' resulting in
'siltation' in the water supply thus making the water unsafe until supply systems are cleaned
hence water shortages. Shortages also result from damage to water mains and other water
distribution infrastructure during storms and hurricanes causing disruption in potable supply for
prolonged periods.
(ii) Community Infrastructure: Residents squatting on crown lands in the Mt. Pandy area of South
St. George were relocated to rocky, hilly terrain in La Sagesse, St. David's and Beausejour, in
North West St. George, where preparation for the relocation could be said to have begun in 2006,
continued throughout 2007 and culminating with all residents relocated by the end of 2008.
Residents were essentially given tenuous housing with no infrastructure such as roads,
embankment walls and drains in their new locations. They are thus vulnerable to damage to
housing foundation during heavy rainfall which may cause land slippage, landslides and stone
movement while unable to receive immediate emergency services because of absence of
motorable roads.
(iii) Public Accommodation for the Elderly: the Cadrona Home in rural St. Andrew's and Hills
View home in rural St. John's are at different levels of physical vulnerability to natural hazards,
with Hills View requiring structural assessment to maintain and preserve its stability while
Cadrona home may eventually be regarded as unsafe to continue accommodating residents
because of the state of disrepair of sections of the facility, including malfunction of its electrical
and plumbing systems.
(iv) Physical and Locational 'at-risk' Schools: Holy Cross RC and St. Patricks Anglican Primary
Schools present various states of disrepair and inadequacies which are potentially exacerbated by
natural hazards. Holy Cross RC is housed in a small wooden structure incapable of resisting
natural hazards or properly housing the small school population hence utilizes alternative
adjoining accommodation (RC Church Parish Hall) which is in various states of disrepair and
which occasionally is used by the community and ultimately must return to communal uses. St.
Patrick's Anglican school is in various states of physical vulnerability and subject to leaking roof
among other risks.
(v) Communities/Businesses/Public Services in flood zones / flood prone areas:
Families, businesses and public srevice institutions are located in areas that are prone to flooding
which casues damage to residential and commercial property, inaccessibility to properties for
7
owners, operators and businesses by customers, traffic and other service delivery disruptions in
River Road (St. John's River) in the Town of St. George's, Morne Rouge and Dusty Highway in
South St. George.
(vi) Road Networks and Commuters : land slips on Gouyave Estate, River Road and Constantine
main roads result in gradual loss of road surface area over time. Such loss can often be rapid
during heavy or prolonged rain season or hurricanes. Land slips also results in traffic diversions,
delays and commuting over longer distances because of diversions. Land slips may also induce
vehicle accidents as drivers try to navigate away from land slip edges Rock falls from unstable
hillsides in the town of St. George's, Brizan and Grand Anse Housing Scheme pose danger,
injury or death to individuals and damage to property (vehicles and homes).
(vii) Bridges: aged single lane bridges in Gouyave and Gouyave Estate in St. John's are
increasingly unsafe. Heavy rainfall have destroyed bridge foundations on the Hubble Bridge in
Gouyave Estate which has been closed to vehicular traffic for several years while the Lance
Bridge is aged and deteriorating. Its size and design was never adequate for residents, pedestrians
and commuters on the busy thoroughfare that is the Western Main Road passing through the
Lance in Gouyave. It is also increasingly vulnerable to damage during huricannes.
Component 2 - Regional Platforms for Hazard and Risk Evaluation, and Applications for Improved
Decision making and Building Practices. The program would support regional efforts in the Eastern
Caribbean to build capacity to conduct assessment of natural risks and integrate such knowledge into
policy- and decision-making for development investments, disaster risk mitigation, climate change
adaptation and disaster response planning across sectors. Activities to be financed include studies
required for the development of works packages such as hydrologic/hydraulic studies, geotechnical
studies, and associated pre-engineering and engineering supervision activities required to support
engineering design and safeguard compliance
Component 3 - Emergency Response Contingent Credit. Following an adverse natural event, or
immediately before the occurrence of an adverse natural event - and subject to a declaration of a national
emergency in accordance with national law - the GoG may request the World Bank to re-categorize
financing or add contingent financing to cover early recovery and rehabilitation costs. In the event of an
emergency, the contingent component would be implemented following the rapid response procedures
governed by OP/BP 8.00.
Component 4 - Project Management and Implementation Support. Activities under this component
relate to the institutional support and capacity development for project management and implementation.
Activities include training, staffing, and development activities associated with project execution, such as
consulting services and engineering support. The activities under this component do not have specific or
direct impacts on populations but are critical to the implementation of the project.
Component 1 has direct impacts from physical works at the following sites in Table 1 below, which may
give rise to possible resettlement (viz.; Lance Bridge Replacement) and possible compensation for small
amounts of land acquisition or small portions of property loss (all other sites in Table 1) in accordance
8
with 'Policy Objectives' 1 and 2 above or by application of 'Impacts Covered' and 'Required Measures'
as stated in Appendix 2 extracted from OP/BP/4.12).
Table 1: Project Sites Possibly Triggering OP/BP 4.12 by Category and Numbers Affected
CATEGORY
LAND
PROJECT
EST. NO.
OF PEOPLE
OWNERSH
COMMENTS
SITE
AFFECTED
AFFECTED
IP
It is likely that at least one business owner will
Lance Bridge
Private
Business owners /
have to be permanently relocated (based on
2
Replacement
(Church)
bridge design) and will be assisted with
operators
relocation costs.
Hubble
Private
No land acquisition is required. A temporary
Bridge
Business owner
4
pedestrian bypass during bridge replacement
Replacement
works will be required.
Land lord and other tenants' lives on property.
Chemin
Issue surrounds sale of land to construct
Valley
Land lord / Land
reservoir was done according to the Bank's
Private
Generator
7
policy and subsequently approved by the
owner
(same
(Residential)
Bank. The land was purchased from the
House
and
individual)
landowner/property owner who was fully
Reservoir
compensated for the land at market value prior
to handing over deed to new land owners.
Only one business owner will be directly
affected by this project. Arrangements are in
place to permanently relocate the business
owner to a primary tourists' location where
every likelihood of increased income for the
owner can be expected. There is a possibility
Farmer/s,
Several thousand
Constantine
of temporary occupation which would be dealt
Vehicle Owners
commuting across
Private
with according the Bank's policy.
Land Slip
Pedestrians
the Island
While Constantine main road might be off
limits for vehicle and pedestrian traffic for a
period approximately five months, alternative
arrangements are in place to accommodate the
many thousand commuting across the Island
through a bypass road which is only about one
mile longer.
Relocation
of
seven
(7)
businesses and the
possible acquisition
of approximately
St.
John's
Private
Lands near or on the river bank belongs to the
3,000 sq ft of lands
River
Business owners
(Business
government. Only a small amount of land
A total of about
acquisition and property modifications will
Flooding
/ operators
and
160 persons will be
take place guided by the Bank's policy for
Mitigation
-
Roadside
Residential)
affected.
Some
which prompt compensation will have to be
River Road
Vendors
Government
paid to the property owners.
relocation is in the
process of being
finalized
and
property
modifications
is
9
CATEGORY
LAND
PROJECT
EST. NO.
OF PEOPLE
OWNERSH
COMMENTS
SITE
AFFECTED
AFFECTED
IP
likely to affect one
property owners
While no
relocations /
Resettlement is
Morne Rouge
Business owners
anticipated,
Private
No land and other asset acquisition will be
involved. However there are likely to be some
Flooding
/ operators
property
(Business)
amount of modification of property. The
Mitigation
Private residents
modifications is
Government
Bank's OP will be triggered accordingly.
likely to affect
between 10 and 20
property owners
A range of businesses are located below the
rock fall area. Some have built properties
adjacent to or in boundary with a potential
While there will
land slip on one side but on the other side over
the tunnel exit and Bruce Street, commuters
Residents / home
be no relocations /
and pedestrians have no protection from rock
owners/househol
resettlement
Private
fall. Consequently the tunnel will closed to all
Sendal
ds
however,
(Business,
traffic during the construction phase (approx
Tunnel Rock
Business owners
thousands of
five months). Alternate arrangements have
Residential,
Fall
already been made with the traffic department
/ operators
pedestrians and
Church)
Mitigation
of the Royal Grenada Police Force and
Motoring
and
motor traffic will
Government
Cabinet is also involved to allow for some
pedestrian public
be severely
changes in the road ordinance to facilitate this
affected
project. A joint PR campaign by the traffic
department and the PCU is expected to
commenced in February, 2015 to give the
public the relevant information on the likely
changes in the new traffic arrangements
Tenure issues are completed. Every home
Beausejour
owner has their respective plot of land. The
Relocated
road infrastructure has already been
Community
Residents / home
Government
established. There is expected to be no issue of
Infrastructur
owners
27 home owners
and
encroachment. The Social Development
Specialist with the DVRP is constantly
e
/households
Private
monitoring the situation and is in constant
vulnerability
contact with community residents to ensure
Mitigation
that all their concerns are noted before during
and after construction
Tenure issues are completed. Every home
La
Sagesse
owner has their respective plot of land. The
road infrastructure has already been
Relocated
established. There is expected to be no issue of
Community
Residents / home
Government
encroachment. Additionally, all other utilities
Infrastructur
owners
33 home owners
are also available to community residents.
and Private
e
/households
The Social Development Specialist with the
DVRP is constantly monitoring the situation
Vulnerability
and is in constant contact with community
Mitigation
residents to ensure that all their concerns are
noted before during and after construction
10
1.2. Detailed Description of Modified or New Project Activities - Additional Financing
(January 2015)
Component 1: Prevention and Adaptation Investments
The proposed AF would support carrying out of selected infrastructure investments and
related supporting studies, including: (a) works pre-engineering studies and design for
drainage mitigation system in the Morne Rouge area; b) river defense systems; and c)
investment in fiber optic upgrades to assist agencies with participating in a national data
sharing platform (i.e. GeoNode, national hydro-met network) which will store, manage and
disseminate large datasets required to incorporate climate information in planning, design
and engineering activities.
This component would be used to scale up to increase the impact of RDVRP in terms of
building disaster and climate resilience of the built infrastructure in the proposed Project
locations. Specific sub-projects and activities identified under this component are
summarized as follows:
Activity
Mourne Rouge drainage
project pre-engineering
studies and design
St Johns River Defense
System
Fiber optic upgrades
Mourne Rouge drainage project pre-engineering studies and design
Background.
Flooding in the Morne Rouge area has now become an annual occurrence with each event
increasing in severity due to increased local development and impacts from sea level rise.
The flooding affects directly and indirectly, all but one of the major hotels located in the
Grand Anse beach, one of Grenada's most iconic tourist attractions, as well as the largest
shopping mall on the island, other smaller businesses, the local police station, the largest
multipurpose hall on the island, a youth centre, approximately 4 ha of Crown Land
property and access to residential areas.
Sub-project rationale
Given the importance of tourism in the area of the Morne Rouge drainage system,
interventions will pay particular attention to reducing recurrent flooding without damaging
the coastal resources associated with Grand Anse Beach. Additionally, future development
11
plans need to be taken into account to help ensure that interventions are not overcome by
hydraulic changes provoked by future development.
Proposed Investments
Pre-engineering studies (including data collection) and design are expected to require,
under a very optimistic scenario, 42 months for completion. The life of the additional
financing project is 42 months. Estimated construction time is approximately 20 months
hence the overall time required for this work is 5 years. This will go well beyond the
completion date of the project. Therefore, in this context, only the pre-engineering study
and engineering design will be commissioned under the project.
St John's River Defense System
Background.
The subject area for this study is located just north of the city of St Georges, in the South-
Western end of the island. The river, near its estuary, is traversed by the main highway
linking St Georges to the north of the island and critical communities such as Victoria,
Gouyave and Marigot.
Extreme flood events within the project area that stakeholders note occurred in 1998, 2002,
2003, 2008 and 2011. The project area is vulnerable to regular flooding³ from St Johns
River, and the current standard of protection is low and below that acceptable for an urban
area such as the River Road area, which includes residential and commercial properties as
well as the national stadium of Grenada. The social impacts are particularly significant
because in this area, the presence of three schools (primary, secondary, high schools
hosting a total of 900 students) whose activities are disrupted by the floods. Impact on
economic activities is equally important given the extent of development and the
importance of River Road for commuting into the capital city. Furthermore, Queen's Park
Power Station, operated by Grenada's electricity company GRENLEC, poses an additional
flood risk to St Johns River. For this reason alone the consequences of major flooding
could be devastating on a national scale, not only affecting the project area.
Sub-project rationale.
A 2006 flood hazard assessment for the entire country was done within the Grenada
National Hazard Mitigation Plan The assessment highlighted that flooding occurs along the
St. John's River on the floodplain, with most vulnerable areas in the vicinity of two sharp
bends and around the stadium by the Humpback Bridge, both of which flood even for a
frequent 2-year rainfall return period. The assessment found that danger posed by flooding
from the 2-year rainfall event generally is low to medium except around the Humpback
Bridge where it is high. For the 5-year rainfall event, the danger increases with a substantial
3
During preparation, a consultation with community members living in the River Road area suggested that flood
occur on average 2-3 times a year.
12
portion of the inundated area designated as high. For higher rainfall 10-year and the 25-
year) events, the assessment indicated that persons should avoid almost all of the inundated
area as there is strong threat to life.
The frequency and effects of flooding are increasing and will continue to do so due to the
effects of development in the catchment area, changes in land use, inadequacy of local
infrastructure, and the ongoing impacts of climate change. Flooding in this area occurs
annually, with expected annual damage estimated at EC$0.7 million (US$0.35 million)⁴.
Changes resulting from natural disasters can similarly cause impact at a catchment scale,
such as the effects of Hurricane Ivan.
Sub-project beneficiaries
Direct project beneficiaries will be 200 people who currently live in housing with
significant flood risk with many more people in the local community suffering secondary
effects of flooding. An estimated 40-50 residential buildings, shops and commercial
properties line the River Road along the Project site, all of which are impacted by water
during a flood event. Three (3) school facilities where more than 900 students are enrolled
are located on the active floodplain with no formal warning of flood events. During major
events floodwaters pose a flood risk to the Power Station and GRENLEC which produces
electricity for Grenada. Due to the predicated effects of climate change and increasing
flood risk from sea level rise and more significant river flooding, more than 200 properties
could be at risk and both direct (property) and indirect damages will be greater due to
property and infrastructure flooding as well as major disruption to the local community,
businesses and traffic.
Proposed Investments
The intervention along the St Johns River project area involves river training works and
protective measures using a combination of reinforced concrete retaining walls,
realignment of the riverbed, and gabions walls. Whenever possible, complementary
vegetative reinforcement will be used to increase resilience of the infrastructure. The flood
mitigation works are designed to reduce flooding by improving river discharge capacity
over a critical 1.65km section terminating at the coast.
Technical studies, including hydrological analysis and hydraulic modeling, site inspection
and research of the previous flood studies have been completed. The Environmental
Specialist reviewed the EIA and noted that it includes an assessment of baseline
environmental conditions, and concurs that no impacts on biodiversity are expected to
occur. The EIA also has developed an EMP with a very comprehensive set of mitigation
measures for construction, which will be adopted and used in the project contracts.
4 Source: Dessau Soprin International
13
Component 2 - Regional Platforms for Hazard and Risk Evaluation, and Applications
for Improved Decision making
Activity
Hazard Data Development
Hydro-meteorological
Infrastructure and Data
Management
Watershed Analysis and
Training for Flood and
Drought Management
Forest Management
Capacity Building
(a) Hazard Data Development
Under this activity the datasets represent the foundation for analyzing the physical
environment of Grenada and form the basis for integrating climate analysis in the
development process. They include: (i) the creation of LiDAR topography ortho-
photography and bathymetry digital datasets as well as watershed extraction; (ii) Scanning
and rectification of historical ortho-photos (covering the past 30 years); (iii) large scale
soils Survey and mapping; (iv) a land use/land cover GIS update; and (v) a GIS update of
drinking water abstraction points and distribution network.
(b) Hydro-meteorological Infrastructure and Data Management
Rainfall and flood response are variable across the country. Rainfall variation is highly
local and varies with altitude and geographic exposure. Critical applications for these data
include the establishment of early warning systems, short and medium term weather
forecasting and surveillance of water borne diseases. Investments are designed to
modernize the current rain and stream gauge network in order to improve field data
resolution to capture and analyze the recurrence of short-term events to support the
development of Intensity, Duration and Frequency curves to be used in engineering and
planning. Together with the geospatial data developed, hydro-meteorological data provides
the analytical input for hydraulic and hydrologic analysis. Investments in hydro-
meteorological infrastructure and data management include inter-alia: (i) Hydrologic
analysis and station optimization study; (ii) Hydromet Data management system; and (iii)
Rain and stream gauge instrument network.
There is significant capacity, locally and especially regionally for meteorological analysis.
Lacking is the ability to assess the orographic effect on Grenada's rainfall distribution with
respect to intensity and duration. Local variability is substantial and significant and
depends on the interaction of the landscape with weather systems. This behavior varies
from watershed to watershed. The project is designed to provide data to calibrate and
14
analyze watershed interactions accounting for orographic effect on a large (watershed)
scale. As observations are recorded over time, these data will feed into engineering design
and development planning, accounting for terrain and coastal exposure to prevailing
conditions (windward - leeward, xeric/mesic regimes, etc.)
(c) Watershed Analysis and Training for Flood and Drought Management
With the data systems in place, the final area of activity is to provide an initial analysis
using data developed and provide training in the development of modeling activities
designed to improve the scientific basis for decision making. Multiple agencies will be
trained in the use of modeling software based on their individual interests and objectives
for integrating improved science in the planning and engineering processes. Activities
include inter-alia: (i) Watershed modeling - rainfall/runoff, erosion and sedimentation; (ii)
Stream flow Modeling; (iii) Remote Sensing/GIS Training; and (iv) ERDAS Image
Analysis Software.
(d) Forest Management Capacity Building
Under this activity, the AF will contribute to one of the key outcome indicators of the
Grenada Strategic Program for Climate resilience, namely the restoration and improvement
of the national forest resources. Specifically, the project will fill critical knowledge gaps
and build capacity needed of the Grenada Forestry Department for planning and
implementing reforestation and watershed rehabilitation programs in the future. This will
include: (i) Basic data and analysis for forest management (soil map, forest cover and
inventory); (ii) Nursery rehabilitation and procurement of equipment and supplies; (iii)
Framework and guidance note on how to carry out sustainable reforestation programs; and
(iv) Sub-regional collaboration with other forestry departments of Windward Islands (in
particular, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Dominica).
Component 4 - Project Management and Implementation Support
For the two additional Project years, the AF would support strengthening and developing
the institutional capacity for project management and improving the GoG's capacity to
coordinate SPCR implementation. This will be accomplished through the provision of
technical advisory services, training, operating costs and acquisition of goods. Project
management and implementation support activities may include training and capacity
building through participating in regional workshops and seminars. These activities are
designed to: (i) improve capacity of the PCU and relevant government agencies in project
management, implementation support, and coordination with other climate resilience
investments in Grenada; (ii) improve capacity of the PCU and relevant government
agencies to monitor the delivery of the SPCR (including climate resilience activities
supported by other development partners), monitor and report on the PPCR core indicators,
and generate knowledge for other participating countries.
15
Rationale for Preparation of the Resettlement Framework
World Bank policy requires "screening" of all projects proposed for Bank financing to help
ensure that they take social concerns into account with respect to adverse impacts on project
affected people (PAP's) and to appropriately plan for and respond to these impacts, and thus
improve decision making about resettlement, options, alternatives, participation of PAP's and
compensation. In the process of project preparation, screening of all projects proposed concluded
that under Operational Policy (OP) 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement Policy) some project sites
may involve land acquisition, loss of assets such as buildings, crops and other property of value
such as trees and plants, property modification and physical resettlement of some persons /
families. A Resettlement Framework therefore becomes necessary for the "Grenada Disaster
Vulnerability Reduction Project (DVRP)" including activities proposed under the additional
financing. This ensures that involuntary resettlement, which can have impoverishing effects on
displaced persons, is fully addressed. The policy includes activities to address and mitigate these
risks. This present document (Resettlement Framework Policy (RPF)) is the instrument to be
used to guide the process of addressing adverse impacts which are likely to include land
acquisition leading to displacement or partial or full loss of other assets and other property of
PAPs. The RPF is to guide this process in accordance with policy objectives of OP 4.12 as
outlined above.
1.4. Objectives of the Resettlement Framework
The purpose of the Resettlement Framework is to outline the principles for social impact
mitigation on PAPs regarding compensation for partial, full or other loss of property, livelihood,
relocation or resettlement. The framework is valid for all sub-project activities executed under
the DVRP attracting World Bank (WB) financing and including other donor financing in the
DVRP project sites outlined in Table 1 above, and in accordance with the WB Policy Objectives
as stated in OP 4.12.
1.5. Adverse Social Impacts
The project aims to reduce vulnerability of human and physical assets to natural hazards. During
project Implementation, project activities will have adverse social impacts. Adverse social
impacts in accordance with OP/BP/4.12 (see appendix 2) refer to relocation or loss of shelter,
loss of assets or access to assets and loss of income sources or means of livelihood. Such adverse
social impacts are most likely to affect the families and businesses who may have to be
permanently relocated from the location near or on the Lance Bridge in Gouyave (based on the
design of the bridge), and who may have to find alternative income sources or access to
livelihoods because their new location may not provide the same or equal opportunities for
business (volume of customers / sales) as that currently enjoyed at the bridge location which is a
main thoroughfare for vehicles and pedestrians. Adverse social impacts are also likely to come
16
upon families who may be relocated from the near the Lance Bridge and who currently enjoys
easy access to livelihood from fishing and fishing resources which is a dominant feature, culture
and pattern of livelihood for many families in Gouyave and who may operate small vending and
other small scale commercial activities from their homes / kitchens because of the ready supply
of customers near the bridge. Attempts will be made to mitigate adverse impacts in parallel with
project implementation; and where possible in the earliest stages of project implementation; and
in other cases before Project implementation as required by OP 4.12 where resettlement PAPs
are involved.
With the stated aim of the project to reduce vulnerability of human and physical assets to natural
hazards, some activities will have to include temporary relocation of populations during
rehabilitations of schools and homes for the elderly; displacement of business and households for
Lance Bridge Replacement, disruption of access to relocated communities of Beausejour and La
Sagesse and similar activities in project sites in Table 1 above. These activities will be
implemented after consultation and participation with stakeholders, to a large extent relying on
inputs from the stakeholders and in accordance with relevant sections of the World Bank Policy
on Resettlement.
2. INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
2.1. Project Organizational Framework
The Ministry of Finance (MOF) is the Government of Grenada's (GOG's) lead institution
responsible for the implementation of the Projectct The Government will be established a
Project Steering Committee (PSC) with part of its responsibility being to coordinate Project
Monitoring and Evaluation and Project Management activities.
The Project Steering Committee will be established under the auspices of the MOF and be
comprised of representatives from beneficiary institutions which include the Ministry of
Agriculture, NAWASA, GAA, the Ministry of Works, the Ministry of the Environment, and the
Ministry of Housing, Lands and Community Development. It will be chaired by the Permanent
Secretary of MOF or as designated by the Permanent Secretary of MOF. The Permanent
Secretary of MOF can appoint additional members to the Steering Committee as deemed
necessary. The PCU will also be represented.
Executing Agencies
Because of the cross-sectoral nature of the project some key institutions have been identified
with co-responsibilities for execution of project activities. The Ministry of Works will assist
with technical and engineering support as well as the environmental safeguard aspect for the
infrastructural component of the project. The Ministry of Housing and Community development
17
on the other hand will provide support to the Social Development Specialist who will be hired to
monitor the social safeguard aspect of the project
Project Management and Monitoring
The overall responsibility for managing the operations of the project rests with the PCU of the
Ministry of Finance. However, a Social Development Specialist will be hired to assist the PCU
to ensure timely action on resettlement issues that may arise.
2.2. Resettlement Planning Principles and Process
The MOF/PCU in association with relevant ministries such as MOHLCD/MOSD/Ministry of
Legal Affairs (MLA) will provide the general direction for the planning of the
relocation/compensation process; ensure coordination between various stakeholders concerned
with the Project including those directly connected with resettlement and monitor the
implementation. At launching of each project approved for bank financing, stakeholders will be
consulted to establish planning principles and work arrangements aimed at identifying and
mitigating adverse social impacts induced by the project's activities. Baseline surveys, valuation
of
properties
and
payment
of
compensation
will be effected ahead of the commencement of works. All PAPs will be consulted in the process
with respect to the particular instance affecting them and requiring compensation; whether in the
context of resettlement/compensation or in the context of mitigating other project related social
impacts.
The MOF/PCU will be expected to make arrangements and incorporate the relevant line
ministries such as Ministry of Housing Lands and Community Development (MOHLCD),
Ministry of Social Development (MOSD) or other private entity or NGO to conduct the survey
and registration of PAPs and properties at Project sites, establish compensation arrangements in
accordance with legal framework for doing so, effect the valuation of crops and trees and
whatever asset or item of value affected, execute the valuation of houses and execute the
payment of compensation.
3. LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR COMPENSATION
Apparent relevant sections from two (2) applicable pieces of legislation are extracted and
provided below. Additional research is to be conducted to determine if applicale amendments
exists and apply.
18
3.1. Compensation Laws
Legislation in Grenada that govern compensation to individuals for assets forgone or acquired
compulsorily for public purposes including for resettlement are contained principally in the
Grenada CONSTITUTION ORDER 1973 and the LAND ACQUISITION ACT (CAP 159) of
1945 (including the Land Acquisition Amendment Act 16 of 1991). Other relevant legislation
include the LAND SETTLEMENT ACT (CAP 161) of 1933 with respect to declarations of Land
Settlements and breaches thereto but not specifically to land and other asset acquisition as
delineated by the banks resettlement policy (an outline of provisions in the Land Settlement Act
is outlined in Annex 3).
Grenada CONSTITUTION ORDER 1973
All compensation for compulsory land or other asset acquisition originates and derives from
Grenada's constitutional order. Compensation is established as a fundamental right of every
citizen whose property is compulsorily acquired by the state for public purposes. The
constitution states that every person, regardless of race, place of origin, political opinion, colour,
creed or sex is entitled to:
"Protection for the privacy of his home and other property and from deprivation of property
without compensation" (Chapter 1, No. 1 (c) and for " prompt payment of full compensation"
(No. 6 (1), see Annex 3 for more details) and further states that; "Every person having an interest in
or right over property which is compulsorily taken possession of or whose interest in or right over any
property is compulsorily acquired shall have a right of direct access to the High Court for-
a. the determination of his interest or right, the legality of the taking of possession or acquisition of
the property, interest or right and the amount of any compensation to which he is entitled and
b. the purpose of obtaining prompt payment of that compensation":
In general terms the provisions of the constitution are consistent with and typical of that enunciated by the
World Bank's policy on resettlement, especially where the bank's policy calls for prompt compensation
and recourse to redress where a dispute arises thereto.
More specifically, provisions are outlined in the Land Acquisition Act 1945 and Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Act of 1991) (See Appendix 3 for a detailed outline of the process of acquisition and other
pertinent details of this Act)
19
LAND ACQUISITION ACT (CAP 159)
(Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act of 1991)
"Compensation" means prompt and full compensation as provided for, by and under the constitution and
"Land" includes freehold, leasehold and mortgage interest (Amendment Act)
(3)"And the Crown in accordance with the relevant provisions of the constitution and of this Act make
prompt payment of such full compensation as may be due"
Authorized officer to treat with landowner
6. (1) As soon as a declaration has been published in accordance with the provisions of section 3 (that
is, acquisition of any land by the Governor General for public purpose, and a declaration
published accordingly), the authorized officer shall, without delay, enter into negotiations (or
further negotiations) for the purchase of the land to which the declaration relates upon the
reasonable terms and conditions, and by voluntary agreement with the owner of the land.
(2) Every notice of acquisition under this section shall -
(c) Require all persons interested, as soon as is reasonably practicable, either -
(i)
to appear personally or by attorney or agent before the authorized officer to state the
nature of their respective interests in the land and the amounts and full particulars of
their claims to compensation in respect of those interests, distinguishing the amounts
under separate heads and showing how the amount claimed under each head is
calculated; or
(ii)
to render to the authorized officer a statement in writing, signed by them or by their
attorneys or agents, setting forth the like matters.
Appointment and Powers of Board of Assessment
Determination of questions by Board of Assessment
11. (1) All question and claims relating to the payment of compensation under this Act and to the
apportionment of such compensation shall, save as is hereinafter provided, be submitted to a
Board of Assessment to be appointed in each case in accordance with the provisions of section
12.
(2) A Board of Assessment shall have full power to assess, award and apportion compensation in
such cases, in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
Appointment of the Board of Assessment
12. (1)
As soon as it becomes necessary to do so the Governor-General shall cause a Board of
Assessment (hereinafter referred to as "a Board" or "the Board") to be appointed.
20
(2) A Board for the purpose of this Act shall in every case consist of -
(a)
a Judge of the High Court who shall be the chairman of the Board (hereinafter
referred to as "the chairman");
(b)
a member to be appointed by the Governor-General; and
(c)
a member to be nominated by the owner of the land to be acquired:
if there is any difference of opinion as to the amount of compensation that should be awarded, the
decision of the chairman shall be deemed to be the decision of the Board.
Inquiry by Board
14.
Where a Board has been appointed under this Act, the Board shall hold an inquiry at a
place, date and time to be fixed by the chairman, of which not less than fourteen clear
days' notice shall be given to the parties concerned, and every such inquiry shall be
conducted in public.
Award of Board
17. (1) At the conclusion of the inquiry, the Board shall decide upon the claims for compensation
and apportionment submitted to them and shall in accordance with the provisions of this
act promptly make an award of such full compensation as may be due, and the said award
shall be under the hand of the chairman who shall cause such award to be filed in the
Supreme Court (Amendment Act 1991)
(2) The decision of the majority of the members of the Board with respect to the compensation
to be paid shall be deemed to be the decision of the Board and, if all the members of the
Board differ, the mean between the amount decided upon by the chairman and that one of
the amounts decided upon by the two other members of the Board which approximates
most nearly to the amount decided upon by the chairman shall be deemed to be the
compensation awarded by the Board.
(3) Subject to the provisions of the constitution and the Courts Order, an appeal against a
decision of the board shall lie to such Court that exercises jurisdiction to hear appeals
direct from the high court (Amendment Act 1991)
Determination of Small Claims for Compensation
Procedure where claim for compensation does not exceed certain amounts
18. (1)
Anything in any Act to the contrary notwithstanding, in any case in which the
compensation claimed does not exceed two hundred and fifty dollars, and in any case in
which the compensation claimed does not exceed five hundred dollars and, in the latter
case, the parties agree in writing to the settlement of the claim by a magistrate, the amount
of the compensation to be paid in any such case shall be determined by a magistrate.
21
(2)
It shall be lawful for any magistrate, upon the application of either party with respect to
any question of disputed compensation in either of the cases mentioned in the preceding
subsection, to summon the other party to appear before him at a time and place to be
named in such summons and to hear and determine such question of disputed
compensation.
(3)
For the purposes of any proceeding under this section -
(a) the procedure to be followed thereat, the summoning and remuneration of witnesses
and all questions incidental to such proceeding shall be governed by any Act for the
time being in force relating to the recovery of claims before a magistrate and all the
provisions of any such Act shall apply mutatis mutandis to any such proceeding; and
(b) The provision of sections 103 to 121 of the Civil Procedure Act shall apply with such
verbal alteration (not affecting the substance) as may be necessary to make the same
applicable.
(4)
An appeal shall lie against the determination by magistrate of any question of disputed
compensation under this section in like manner as if such determination was given in the
exercise of summary jurisdiction of a magistrate in a civil matter under the provisions of
the Magistrates Judgments (Appeals) Act, and for the purposes of such appeal the
determination of the magistrate under this section shall be deemed to be a judgment of the
magistrate within the meaning of section 2 of the same Act.
Provisions Governing Assessment of Compensation
Rules for assessment of compensation
19.
Subject to the provisions of this Act, the following rules shall apply to the assessment
and award of compensation by a Board for the compulsory acquisition of land -
(a) The value of the land shall, subject as hereinafter provided, be taken to be the
amount which the land, if sold in the open market by a willing seller, might have
been expected to have realized at a date twelve months prior to the date of the
second publication in the Gazette of the declaration under section 3:
Provided that this rule shall not affect the assessment of compensation for any
damage sustained by the person interested by reason of severance, or by reason of
the acquisition injuriously affecting his other property or his earnings, or for
disturbance, or any other matter not directly based on the value of the land; (This
in particular addresses OB/BP/4.12 which emphasises compensation for all assets
and losses associated with the acquisition including loss of access to income
sources further, in this can be construed all other requirements of the
compensatory mechanism, thus making this provision wholly compatible with
22
that of the World Bank's Resettlement Policy OB/BP/4.12, including in
accordance with those outlined in Annex 2 of this RPF)
Interest
20.
The Board, in awarding compensation, may add thereto interest at the rate of five per
cent per annum, calculated from the date upon which the authorized officer entered
into possession of the land acquired until the date of the payment of the compensation
awarded by the Board
21. (1) The authorized officer shall pay to the claimant the reasonable cost incurred by him in
or about the preparation and submission of his claim, unless the chairman considers
that the claimant has failed to put forward a proper claim within a reasonable time
after the service of the notice under section 7 or that the claim put forward is grossly
excessive or that he has been a party to some deceit or fraud in respect of his claim.
Compensation to persons interested in adjacent land
24.
A person interested in any land which, without any portion thereof being compulsorily
acquired, has been injuriously affected by the erection or construction on land
compulsorily acquired of any works in respect of which the land was acquired, shall be
entitled to compensation in respect of such injurious affection:
Special provisions as to leases
25. (1) If any land shall be comprised in a lease for a term of years unexpired and part only of
such land shall be acquired compulsorily, the rent payable in respect of the land
comprised in such lease may, on the application of the lesser or the lessee to a Judge of
the High Court, be apportioned between the land acquired and the residue of the land.
Conveyancing etc. costs to be paid by authorized officer
28.
All reasonable costs, charges, and expenses incurred by the owners of lands or persons
interested therein for all conveyances, and assurances of any lands purchased or acquired,
and of any outstanding terms of interest therein, and of deducing, evidencing and
producing title to such lands, terms or interest, and of making out such abstracts and
attested copies as the authorized officer may require, shall be paid by the authorized
officer.
Limitation of time for making claims
31.
Except with the approval of the Governor-General in any case in which he considers that
injustice may otherwise be done, no claim for compensation which may be made under
the provisions of this Act shall be admitted or entertained unless the same shall be made
23
within twelve months after the date on which entry has been made on the land under
section 4 or, if a declaration has been made under section 3, within a similar period after
the date of the second publication of such declaration.
3.2. GOG Strategy for Expropriation and Compensation
The GOG strategy for expropriation and compensation applies to component 2 of the project that
involves possible resettlement and other possible property loss. This section illustrates how
compensation applies (or may not apply) to the populations affected by the project. The
application of constitution and the procedures of the Land Acquisition Act as outlined above will
apply with respect to appropriation of lands and loss of all other assets associated with the DVRP
activities. Less clear are application of provisions of the Act and those of the bank policy where
'Required Measures', No. 6 C (I and ii), 10, 11, 12 and 13 (a) - (c) are concerned (see annex 2
for details of 6 C (I and ii)) to 13 (a) - (c), in so far as no specific mention are made in the
relevant government legislation but which the general provisions of the constitution may apply
and where 19 (a) of the Land Acquisition Act above especially the latter part of (a) may
specifically apply or construe to apply; if these are deemed divergent, they are not onerous and
can be built into the meaning and application 19 (a) of the Acquisition Act, and detailed and
costed as part of the "Implementation Process" in 4.1 below or as part of the "Plan of Action" to
be developed which will outline measures to assist displaced persons experiencing losses or
hardships associated with the project. In case of divergence between the Government laws and
Bank Policy - Bank policy applies.
Participation and consultation of PAPs will be widely used (as has been used in preparation of
the Social Assessment of the DVRP) to gauge potential PAPs understanding and reaction to
expropriation and their expectation of compensation where income or livlihoods may be loss or
property and assets affected. The initial survey conducted for the Social Assessment (SA) for the
DVRP has provided insights on these issues
Need for Compensation
As has been pointed out in Table 1 above, various project sites will involve activities that may
require land acquisition, property modification, disruption of livelihoods and relocation /
resettlement and other loss of assets. The GOG will therefore apply the requirements of the Land
Acquisition Act where appropriate and where gaps in the process are determined to effect
compensation or may affect appropriate compensation (i.e.; determining and addressing gaps
between the Land Acquisition Act and the OP 4.12). This is necessary so that the PCU and its
relevant stakeholders / executing agencies such as MOF/MOHLCD/MOW/MOSD could assist
24
the populations affected such as to be resettled with transport, other logistics, housing or cash
equivalent in accordance with any compensation agreement.
The preliminary survey already conducted targeted generally the potential PAPs but did not
specifically identify them. A specific survey to identify PAPs will have to be conducted by the
PCU so that the range of likely "affects" on PAP's such as those without land titles will also be
provided land in accordance with the legal status of the land that they previously occupied or
cultivated or otherwise exploited (for instance there are possible cases in Grenada where persons
may have lived on or rented property for many years without ownership or have been living on
family lands or lands deemed "gifts" from family but have no titles or other verifiable sources to
authenticate use or presence on such lands). If such persons are affected by project activities,
their status must not make them worse off or disadvantaged in any relocation / resettlement /
compensation arrangement. Their protection will be in accordance with OP 4.12 where local
legislation may be silent.
3.3. World Bank Procedures for Resettlement/Rehabilitation (OP 4.12)
The World Bank operational directive OP 4.12 states: "Where the specific resettlement needs of
each subproject are not known in advance, the borrower would need to agree to resettlement
policies, planning principles, institutional arrangements and design criteria that meet Bank policy
and requirements as a condition of the loan. An estimate should be provided of total population
to be displaced and overall resettlement costs, as well as an evaluation of proposed resettlement
sites. Subprojects in sector investment loans should be screened by the implementing agency to
ensure consistency with this directive, and approved individually by the Bank".
The commitment of the MOF/PCU with respect to the Grenada DVRP to comply with the
requirements of World Bank's operational directives should be made explicit and incorporated in
the credit agreement. Furthermore, the MOF/PCU will have to ensure, in the credit agreement, its
commitment to addressing the adverse social impacts of project operations. It has expressed such
commitment by its participation in some of the preliminary consultations already undertaken
with possible project affected communities and the PCU have pursued initial actions or advocacy
on behalf of populations at prospective DVRP project sites.
4. ORGANIZATIONAL PROCEDURES
The MOF will be responsible for the organizational arrangements associated with implementing
and delivery of entitlements relevant to mitigating adverse impacts and compensation.
4.1. Implementation Process
The process for implementing the mitigatory measures is
25
(i) To determine if land acquisition or acquisition and loss of other assets will occur or
resettlement is required (Specific PAP's survey need to be done at each of the project
sites after confirmation of which of the subprojects have been approved)
(ii) To draw up a detailed list of all persons affected (PAPs).
(iii) To determine what each PAP stands to lose (valuation of houses, land, crops and other
properties).
(iv) To determine what the timeframe is for compensation.
(v)The development of a RAP and submission to the World Bank for no objection.
(vi) To offer compensation (kind or cash).
(vii) To determine what the preferred compensation is (participatory process).
4.2. Grievance Redress Mechanism
PAPs will have opportunities to present complaints and grievances through the resettlement
process as set out in the Land Acquisition Act (see paragraph 14, 17 [3] and 18 [3 and 4] of
Section III above. It sets out the grievance redress process and who is responsible at various
stages). The mechanisms for redressing the grievances of the affected populations will begin
through consultation (i.e., meetings / consultation with any and all PAP to provide information
and gauge expectations of compensation, interest in form or type of compensation, provide
clarification on other forms of assistance...). Beyond the consultative process, the process by
which grievances will be redressed, for each project site where PAP's are identified will be in
accordance with the Land Acquisition Act as indicated above. The Act also provides for
representatives of PAP's on the Board presiding over the grievance.
Institutional Responsibility for Implementation
Implementation Stages
Agency
Responsibility
Facilitate and support all
Project Preparation
PCU/ Social Development
relevant project RAP actions.
Specialist
PCU/ Social Development
1. Identify the affected persons
Specialist
consult and advise them on
their rights as per OP/BP 4.12
2. Follow up on all site issues
and matters related to any
complaint which may arise
during the implementation
process.
26
3. Manage and monitor the
grievance redress process.
4. Secure the necessary
resettlement
assistance
required - not required in this
sub project.
Project Implementation
PCU/Social Development
Overall monitoring
Specialist and Project
Engineer
PCU/ Social Development
1.Assess and process PAP
Specialist
complaint(s)
2. Manage and monitor the
grievance redress process
High Court of Grenada
Receive, assess and process
Lands Department (MOCDH)
and decide on /grievances
complains related to sub
project.
Should grievance remain unresolved beyond the Board review process, the Land Acquisition Act
outlines the process for referral to a civil court to settle the grievance since the Act indicates that
persons affected by land acquisition has the right to take their matter to the court when other
grievance redress measures have failed (such as in cases where PAPs may refuse the
compensation offered)
Procedures for Grievance Redress
Grievances are issues, concerns, problems, or claims (be it perceived or actual)
that an individual or a community group wants a project promoter/owner to
address or resolve.
The grievance process to follow if a PAP feels aggrieved is as follow.
Step (i).
Verbally express grievance to the Social Development Specialist (SDS)
who is located in the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) office at the
Grenada Cocoa and Nutmeg Association (GCNA) Karani James
Boulevard, St. George's.
Step (ii).
Fill out and hand in the Grievance Form (see annex 1) which can be
collected from the Social Development Specialist; or call 443-0531/2 to
express complain verbally which will be written down by the SDS; or
e-mail to:pcu@gail.com; or mail in to PCU office at the Grenada
Cocoa and Nutmeg Association (GCNA) Karani James Boulevard, St.
George's.
27
Step (iii).
Social Development Specialist will submit form to head of Grievance
Appeal Committee no later than two (2) days after receiving
complain(s) from PAPs
Step (iv).
The Head of the Grievance Appeal Committee will convene a meeting no
later than one (1) week after receiving complain with the other
members of the committee.
Step (v).
A decision will be reached which will be final and filed in the Court or
further research into the situation recommended by the head of the
Grievance Appeal Committee. In such a case another meeting of the
Grievance Appeal Committee will be convened appropriately and
decisions taken.
The Committee will be chaired by the head of the PCU and therefore, the PCU will provide all
the necessary support to enable the committee to assume its role including clerical work and
budget support. The committee must be based in a location that lends for easy access to PAPs
and other people who may raise any claims or complains during the implementation of the
project. The Grievance Appeal Committee is located at the Nutmeg Complex on the Karani
James Boulevard. This will ensure that the PAPs with their grievances are not placed in a
disadvantage position when their issues are discussed. This building is known for its
publicness or easy access to the general public. These claims and complains will be received
and processed to the Committee for thorough assessment and further required actions
within one week of receiving them. The maximum time to solve a grievance or complaint is
three (3) months.
4.3 Grievance Appeal Committee Role
(i) The Committee through the Social Development Specialist will receive and register all
appeals and complaints by consulting with the complainant. The Committee will response
to all complains with a rational justification describing the process with which the
complaint was considered and explaining the reason for the decision reached by the
Committee.
(ii) The Appeal Committee is the final forum for decisions on any claim for compensation of
any sort.
(iii) The Appeal Committee will meet as required to review complains which have been
received.
(iv) The committee may make call on witnesses, a facilitator or expert to provide additional
information, testimony or opinion. These individuals act in an advisory capacity only and
their input advice or opinion will not be binding on the Committee.
28
(v) The Committee will consider each complaint on a case by case basis to determine
whether the case constitutes a valid complaint, if a complaint is valid the Committee is
required to find fair and just solution to the claim.
(vi) The Grievance Appeal Committee comprise the following persons:-
(a) The head of the Project Coordinating Unit Ministry of Finance
(b) The head of the Physical Planning Unit Ministry Of Works
(c) The head of Lands department Ministry of Community Development
(d) The Controller of Inland Revenue Department Ministry of Finance and
(e) The Social Development Specialist (DVRP)
(vii) All Committee deliberations and decisions must be properly documented and
preserved for records.
4.4. Arrangements for Funding
Arrangements for funding will be determined by the MOF which will make the necessary
provision in the Government Consolidated Fund.
5. OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES
5.1. Institutional Framework
The MOF is headed administratively by a Permanent Secretary and two Deputy Permanent
Secretaries, one of whom have specific oversight for projects such as the DVRP. The PCU of the
MOF has specific responsibilities for fiduciary aspects of the project which includes procurement
and financial management. It will also be responsible for day to day management which
includes coordination, monitoring and evaluation. As alluded to before a Social Development
Specialist will be hired to assist with the monitoring of social safeguard issues.
5.2. Project Launching
Typically, a project launch is part of a national exercise to inform the national community about
the project, including what it entails and not entail and how it may impact the wider community.
If such a launch is contemplated, activities at project launching will have to be determined. The
Launch design may however be informed and or influenced by outcomes of the Social Screening
and Consultations following the preliminary Social and Environmental Impact Assessment
conducted at the potential project sites. These impact assessments included consultations with
various stakeholders and potential PAPs and provide environmental characteristics as well as
preliminary indicators of demography; land tenure; socio-economic status of some Potential
PAPs. Preliminary household surveys conducted contain general household data such as: family
size, gender and age information; education; occupation; land ownership in at least four of the
potential project sites and in addition to this data at these four possible project sites; average
income / source of income is included in the data gathered another two potential project sites.
29
More detailed Surveys will have to be conducted upon approval of the specific subprojects that
would be involved in the DVRP so that upon project launch, an estimate of the extent to which
the affected persons / families will experience loss of assets, including control over resources,
infrastructure and social services (available to PAPs or others at the time and likely to be lost or
disturbed by project activities) would be known.
The survey should further describe local organizations and institutions, village / community /
national organizations, religious groups, etc., that could later participate in planning and
implementing the resettlement options where resettlement is involved. Expected changes in
demography and health impacts should also be addressed. At this stage, all PAPs will be listed in
order to avoid any "free riders" who may try to move to the project sites in order to take
advantage of the compensation or other opportunities associated with resettlement such as
compensation for loss of assets or to obtain land and house where original PAPs may be
relocated to. A cut off date from which eligibility for compensation will not be allowed should
be proclaimed so that persons moving into the project affected areas will not be considered for
compensation upon project implementation. GOG sets out restrictions on claims for
compensation which can be found in paragraph 31 of the Land Acquisition Act above and the
World Banks OP/BP 4.12 provides clarity on cut off dates⁵.
A critical task of the assessment will be to identify new land for those PAPs who will lose their
land (such new or alternative land identified must be disclosed in Project Launch and which must
have been known and satisfactory to PAPs) However, in some cases cash will be paid for lands.
Based on the early screening conducted in the SA, less than 100 persons from all potential
project sites combined are likely to be affected by the DVRP, hence no specific Resettlement
Action Plan (RAP) would be necessary (World Bank Resettlement Policy indicates that where
land acquisition and other adverse social impacts would affect more than 200 persons, a RAP
will have to be prepared i.e., separate and apart from the Resettlement Policy Framework, and to
accompany it, though an abbreviated resettlement plan is to be prepared as indicated earlier in
cases of less than 200 PAPs). This abbreviated resettlement plan is a condition of financing for
sub-project activities. It will include details such as a 'census survey of displaced persons and
valuation of assets' (for further details see paragraph 22 of OP 4.12 i.e., Annex A of
OB/BP/4.12).
5.3. Project Implementation
The PCU will consult with the stakeholders including PAPs, their representatives, government
legal department among others, and upon review and approval of the resettlement / compensation
plan and arrangements by government and the World Bank with respect to social impacts of
5 Normally, this cut-off date is the date the census begins. The cut-off date could also be the date the project area was
delineated, prior to the census, provided that there has been an effective public dissemination of information on the area
delineated, and systematic and continuous dissemination subsequent to the delineation to prevent further population influx.
30
project operations; the expropriation/compensation/resetlement operations is expected to be
executed and completed as soon as possible.
6. SOCIO-ECONOMIC BACKGROUND OF PAPS
6.1. Identification of PAPs
From the preliminary SA, the number of people who would be affected by the project is
estimated to be less than 100 across all possible project sites combined but their identities are not
specifically known. Their economic activities and livelihoods are varied and include formal
employment, self employment (vending, own and operate small and micro enterprises), rely on
remittances from family abroad, while others are in school or unemployed with no source of
income and are hence dependent on others.
It therefore means that a specific study to identify PAPs will be needed, and especially for all
project sites approved where only minor adverse impacts such as loss of small amounts of land
or property modification are likely to be involved. The study will help establish the socio-
economic status of PAPs and serve as the basis for determining eligibility criteria in accordance
with Bank policy and applicable legislation, and for estimating resettlement costs as well as
establishing baseline data for monitoring and evaluation in addition to the data already available
from the Social and Environmental Impact assessments already conducted.
6.2. Social Impacts of the DVRP
Impacts on Land Use, Crops, Buildings and other Property
The DVRP activities' impacts on land use, crops, buildings and other property are expected to
include approximately 14 of the possible 20 project sites. Only small amounts or persons are
likely to be impacted in any significant way and that is with respect to the Lance Bridge
Replacement (the amount who would be affected at this site is based solely on the Bridge design.
Impacts on Economic Activities
The DVRP will affect economic activities of PAP's at some of the potential project sites. The
project is presumed to have positive impacts on mid-term and long-term economic activities on
the individual (micro) and household / community / small and micro enterprise - SME (mezzo)
levels, with respect to water security where individuals / households / SME use water to make
products to earn a livelihood as well as at flood prone sites where loss of business income
earning opportunities are significant when flooding causes inaccessibility to businesses or
damage to business assets that have to be replaced following flooding and so on. The project
activities to mitigate these effects will include new water reservoirs, civil and infrastructural
works such as roads, retaining and embankment walls among others and will likely also employ
PAPs on some activities of the project. These impacts will have beneficial economic outcomes
31
for those potentially affected although short-term disturbance and losses will result if persons
affected by the project have to resettle.
7. METHODS OF VALUING AFFECTED ASSETS
7.1. Organizational Procedures for Delivery of Entitlements
In addition to procedures associated with the relevant or applicable legislations in Grenada, the
Valuation Division and Inland Revenue Department (IRD) of the MOF conducts property
valuations for taxation and related purposes in Grenada. There is also the newly established
Valuation Appeal Board (launched Thursday December 16th 2010). A number of Appeal
Commissioners, chaired by an attorney at law, will form the Board. Among the list of activities
of the Board will be to hear and adjudicate appeals of any taxpayer who files an appeal with the
Board after assessment of valuation of their property by the Comptroller of Inland Revenue, as
well as arbitrate appeals on Property Transfer Tax.
Moreover, Sections 19, 20 and 21 of the Land Acquisition Act provides details of methods of
valuing affected assets. This did not refer to a specific study taking place, it suggest that a study
may have to be conducted. Where the application of various valuation mechanisms existing in
Grenada may not adequately address how and on what basis appropriate compensation is to be
determined or where existing mechanisms may not adequately respond to OP 4.12, options
associated with OP 4.12 may be considered or incorporated. It indicates the following⁶:
With regard to land and structures, "replacement cost" can be obtained using the following
rules: for agricultural land, it is the pre-project or pre-displacement, whichever is higher, market
value of land of equal productive potential or use located in the vicinity of the affected land, plus
the cost of land preparation to levels similar to those of the affected land, plus the cost of any
registration and transfer taxes. For land in urban areas, it is the pre-displacement market value of
land of equal size and use, with similar or improved public infrastructure facilities and services
and located in the vicinity of the affected land, plus the cost of any registration and transfer
taxes. For houses and other structures, it is the market cost of the materials to build a
replacement structure with an area and quality similar to or better than those of the affected
structure, or to repair a partially affected structure, plus the cost of transporting building
materials to the construction site, plus the cost of any labour and contractors' fees, plus the cost
of any registration and transfer taxes.
In determining the replacement cost, depreciation of the asset and the value of salvage materials
are not taken into account, nor is the value of benefits to be derived from the project deducted
from the valuation of an affected asset. Where domestic law does not meet the standard of
6
See Resettlement Policy Framework for the Mitigation of Social Impacts of the Lake Chad Basin Commission
(LCBC) Project entitled "Reversal of Land and Water Degradation Trends in the Lake Chad Basin Ecosystem",
World Bank Africa Safeguards Policy Enhancement Team, RP95, March 29, 2002
32
compensation at full replacement cost, World Bank guidelines and technical specifications for
compensation at replacement cost will be applied.
7.2. Method and Basis of Valuation
Following specific review of the existing methods and basis of valuation available and practiced
via the applicable laws in Grenada as indeed those of the Valuation and IRD; where inadequacies
are determined to exist, those proffered by the World Bank's OP 4.12 can be incorporated to fill
gaps if any. The two methods supported by the Bank's OP 4.12 that can be incorporated into the
existing methods to conduct the valuation of property for PAPs are Replacement Cost and
Compensation Value (taken from same source as in footnote 2 below).
Replacement Cost
The replacement cost approach is based on the premise that the cost of replacing productive
assets that have been damaged because of project operations are taken as a minimum estimate of
the value of measures that will reduce the damage or improve on-site management practices and
thereby prevent damage. The approach involves direct replacement of expropriated assets and
covers an amount that is sufficient for asset replacement, net depreciation, moving expenses and
other transaction costs. This minimum value is then compared to the cost of the new measures.
This is arrived at, by analyzing current construction costs relative to design, materials employed,
workmanship and final finish of the subject properties.
In line with the principles of "equivalent reinstatement" if the premises to be reinstated require
repair, a deduction to reflect this should be made. The deduction for repairs is made in
accordance with the principle that the reinstated property should as far as possible be equal to the
property being reinstated.
The basis of the valuation is Gross Current Replacement Cost (GCRC). Gross Current
Replacement Cost is defined as the estimated cost of erecting a new building having the same
gross external area as that of the existing one, with the site works and services on a similar piece
of land. The valuation process will also consider the use of "compensation value" for affected
properties.
Compensation Value
Compensation value is defined as an amount that is above the gross current replacement cost,
including the costs for the inconvenience caused to the PAP by relocation, and enables the same
PAP to build slightly better houses than what they currently occupy.
Compensation for land, structures, business, fixed improvements and other temporary assets will
be based on market valuation, productivity valuation, negotiated settlements, material and labor
33
valuation, disposition of salvage materials and other fees paid. It should be noted that lack of
title, license or permit would not be a bar to compensation because even squatters have
construction costs relative to design, materials employed, workmanship and final finish. Indeed,
"squatters", may be deemed to be classified under 15 (c) of OP/BP 4.12 as "those who have no
recognizable legal right or claim to the land they are occupying". Under 15 (c) of the policy
which deals with "Criteria for Eligibility', squatters are provided resettlement assistance⁷ in lieu
of compensation for the land they occupy, and other assistance, as necessary, to achieve the
objectives set out in this policy, if they occupy the project area prior to a cut-off date established
by the borrower and acceptable to the Bank. 8 Persons who encroach on the area after the cut-off
date are not entitled to compensation or any other form of resettlement assistance. All persons
included in 15 (c) are provided compensation for loss of assets other than land.
If relocation of business becomes necessary, access to customers and suppliers will be taken into
account. In addition, workers losing employment in the process of relocating should be entitled
to transitional income support.
Compensation for temporary impacts should include, but not limited to, the following:
(i)
Compensation equivalent to lost income required for the duration of impact;
(ii)
Compensation equivalent to lost income required for loss of access; and
(iii)
Physical restoration of assets (or access) required prior to return.
In addition, PAPs will be entitled to transitional assistance which include moving expenses,
temporary residence (if necessary), employment training and income support while awaiting
employment and should have an option for full compensation if duration of impact is to exceed
two years. In preparing the valuation, average costs will have to be assumed. It should be noted
that costs of construction vary from one locality to the other (taken from same source as in
footnote 2).
7.3. Compensation Procedures and Civil Work Schedule
Following survey to identify the specific PAP's, conclusion of the valuation methods and
proceedures, the MOF and other relevant stakeholders such as
/PSC/MOW/MOHLCD/MOSD/MLA will establish compensation proceedures and draw up
schedule of civil works. The MOF/PCU and relevant stakeholders will determine the need for
other structures such as sub-committees to look specifically Housing (for example Housing Sub-
committee), Land (Lands Sub-committee) as may be deemed useful, with representation of PAPs
on each sub-committee relevant to them. Proceedures may include registration of PAPs and
7. Resettlement assistance may consist of land, other assets, cash, employment, and so on, as appropriate.
8. Normally, this cut-off date is the date the census begins. The cut-off date could also be the date the project area
was delineated, prior to the census, provided that there has been an effective public dissemination of information
on the area delineated, and systematic and continuous dissemination subsequent to the delineation to prevent
further population influx.
34
payment or replacement and other compensatory proceedural guidelines; and must take full
account of existing legal and Bank agreed policies and decisions up to this point. Administrative
requirements at this stage would include documenting each administrative decision in this
process.
At this stage, establishment of compensation rates for all aspects of the "affects" of the DVRP on
PAP's should have been concluded in full consultation and agreement with PAP's, and
everything must be done with their knowledges and representation so as to avoid litigation at this
stage, including written agreement of PAPs to the compensation package. If however there are
rejections of the compensation rates or package associated with the particular affect on the PAP,
a grievance mechanism and proceedure should be included with the compensation proceedures to
facilitate the agrieved PAP at this stage including taking his/her case to the court when other
grievance redress measures have failed. The grievance redress mechanism can be found in 17(3)
and 18 (3) and (4) of the Land Acquisition Act above.
8. SOURCES OF FUNDING
A budget to cover expropriation and compensation costs for "affects" on properties and other
assets of PAPs will be determined by the GOG and will come from the GOG Consolidated Fund.
Institutional arrangements specific to that and its incorporation into any previously determined
arrangements will be decided by the Ministry of Finance.
9. CONSULTATION AND PARTICIPATION PROCESS
Relocating or compensating people implies communication or dialogue with them and with other
relevant stakeholders. The consultation and participation process will include four phases: (i)
specific PAP data collection; (ii) preparation and planning of operations; (iii) implementation /
execution of operations; and (iv) monitoring and evaluation. The PCU will coordinate all four
operations.
9.1. Data Collecting Phase
Actors:
PCU
/
MOHLCD
/ MOW possibly consultants, government, PAPs (provision of data)
and secondary data from government and other relevant sources.
The PCU will coordinate the role of actors in the data-collecting phase. This process will include
a survey to specifically identify PAP for each subproject the bank approves for financing
followed by consultations with PAPs identified and other relevant stakeholders especially the
MOW, MOHLCD and project engineers together with PAPs about the extent of affect of the
project on them. The data collected will serve as instruments for the monitoring of the social
mitigation measures to be applied.
35
During the survey, PAPs participation will relate to providing socio-economic information about
their livelihoods. Also, PAPs will be consulted through meetings to discuss the social impacts of
project operations and the mitigation measures suggested. The contributions of the PAPs will be
integrated into the subproject implementation process, from planning to evaluation.
Furthermore, data about the social impacts of the subprojects and the mitigation measures
suggested will be provided via releases to local media for circulation, such as to newspapers,
radio and television stations and popular news and current affairs websites.
9.2. Planning Phase
Actors: PCU / MOW / MOHLCD, PAPs (PAPs re planning inputs, sounding board and advice-
giving on related issues) and representatives of local communities concerned.
Planning and coordination of the tasks of various actors is key to a successful implementation of
the expropriation/compensation arrangements. The PAPs will be consulted with the aim of
obtaining their positions on issues at stake. Their requirements including issues of work, family
and business activities will be incorporated into the expropriation and compensation,
implementation and execution plans.
The planning work and engagement with PAPs and other stakeholders will focus on: (a) taking
stock of the legal framework for compensation; (b) settling institutional arrangements and
mechanisms for payment of compensation; (c) defining tasks and responsibilities of each
stakeholder; and (d) establishing a work plan.
9.3. Implementation / Execution Phase
Actors: MOF/PCU / MOHLCD / MOW / World Bank / MLA / consultants / PAPs (PAPs
endorsement of arrangements).
The execution of the expropriation/compensation operations will be conducted by the MOF/-
and possible Sub-committees or other arrangements to be determined by the Ministry of Finance
and relevant stakeholders. PAPs will be consulted about / involved in the compensation
arrangements prepared. The methodology and procedures for actual payments or delivery of
compensation package will be determined by PCU/stakeholders and PAPs such as receipt of cash
amounts or land or effecting repairs to properties or moving assistance.
9.4. Monitoring and Evaluation Phase
Actors: PCU / PSC / MOLHCD / MOSD / Consultants / PAPs / NGO or other community
representatives.
36
The PCU will organize / convene project completion workshops with actors/stakeholders as
listed here after completion of the expropriation/compensation operations but prior to the
closure of the mitigation measures. The aim of that exercise is to assess progress in the
operations executed, suggest corrective measures where needed and solve pending issues.
After completion of all expropriation/compensation operations, consideration may be given for
PAPs to be consulted in a household survey. The aim of that survey is to assess the impacts of
the social mitigation measures implemented at the individual household level since it is likely
that some PAPs may not attend meetings or speak openly about their experience or interpretation
of the process, measures applied and outcome for them and their families. The findings of the
survey and the workshops will be presented in the project completion report by the PCU. If the
survey is considered useful or necessary, it would require budgetary allocation within the overall
mitigation budget.
10. MONITORING AND EVALUATION ARRANGEMENTS
Actors: PCU / MOHLCD / MOW / PAPs other relevant Community organizations or
representatives.
Monitoring and evaluation will be a continuous process. The PCU will continuously record and
review all expropriation/compensation activities and reports and discuss their contents /
outcomes in its technical and stakeholder meetings. The -PSC will directly monitor
compensation costs review project activities, including social mitigation measures and provide
guidance and coordinate the necessary follow-up of all other stakeholder roles impacting the
acquisition, compensation, monitoring and evaluation exercise.
10.1. Monitoring Principles
A monitoring and evaluation plan of the mitigation measures will be established. The scope of
the plan will take into account the size of the social impacts to be mitigated while respecting
basic monitoring principles. The plans will describe:
(i)The internal monitoring process;
(ii) Key monitoring indicators (a list of monitoring indicators which would be used for
internal monitoring is to be developed / determined and provided);
(iii) Institutional (including financial) arrangements;
(iv) Frequency of reporting and content for internal monitoring, process for integrating
feedback from internal monitoring into implementation;
(v) Financial arrangements for external monitoring and evaluation, including process
for awarding and maintenance of contracts for the duration of resettlement;
(vi) Methodology for external monitoring;
37
(vii) Key indicators for external monitoring, focusing on outputs and impacts; and
(viii) Frequency of reporting and content for external monitoring and process for
integrating feedback from external monitoring into implementation.
Internal Monitoring
Internal monitoring will be conducted by the PCU, following the plan described here. Likewise,
the communities will conduct their own monitoring based on their involvement in the planning
of expropriation and compensation and based on their expectations and agreements. Quarterly or
appropriately timed PCU progress reports will include a section on progress made regarding
mitigation of adverse social impacts.
10.2. External Monitoring and Evaluation
It is expected that external monitoring will be conducted through World Bank supervision
missions. It is to be determined whether the World Bank supervised missions (based on the
frequency of the missions associated with the Bank's work) will be sufficient to monitor progress
in the mitigation of adverse social; impacts. The bank will determined whether these missions
coupled with input from resettlement experts which will also serve to help with local capacity
building for the ongoing exercise and future projects involving resettlement. This will help to
progress on the ground, strengthening analytical capacity, and build on safeguards associated
with documentation of operations executed in accordance with the resettlement plan and
outcomes for PAPs.
Before closure of the mitigation of adverse social impacts, the Bank and GOG- will determine
whether an independent consultant or other independent entity such as an NGO or university
department be contracted to conduct an evaluation of the mitigation measures executed. The
evaluation report will be used as a planning instrument to correct any unresolved or pending
issues and suggest a post-project monitoring period with the aim of ensuring that PAPs are not
worse off in any respect associated with activities or operations of the DVRP, or not likely to be
wore off, where DVRP project activities are not yet underway; and that mitigation activities
associated with any potential disadvantages to PAPs are addressed by the project stakeholders
concerned.
ANNEXES
Annex 1: Grivance Redress Form
Annex 2: Impacts Covered and Required Meaures for Compensating Resettled Persons
38
Annex 1
GRIEVANCE FORM
Indicate the Nature of Grievance(s)
Name
1
Address
2
Contact
Name of Sub Project
3
Date and registration of grievance
4
I agree that the duration of time to solve this grievance will be no longer than three (3)
months unless the Grievance Appeal Committee sees otherwise.
I agree that the Grievance Appeal Committee is the final forum for decisions on any claim for
compensation of any sort and that all decisions will be guided by the applicable laws.
I will abide by the ruling of the Appeal Committee on the outcome of the grievance/complain.
Signature of Complaint
Signature of Agent
Signature of Grievance Officer
OFFICIAL USE
The outcome of the claim is in favour of the complainant
The outcome of this claim is in favour of the defendant
The outcome of this claim requires further research
39
Signature of Chairperson
Annex 2: Impacts Covered and Required Measures for Compensating Resettled
Persons
Impacts Covered
3. This policy covers direct economic and social impacts that both result from Bank-
assisted investment projects¹⁰ and are caused by
(a) The involuntary¹¹ taking of land¹² resulting in
(i)
Relocation or loss of shelter;
(ii)
Lost of assets or access to assets; or
(iii)
Loss of income sources or means of livelihood, whether or not the affected
persons must move to another location
Required Measures
6. To address the impacts covered under para. 3 (a) of this policy, the borrower prepares a
resettlement plan or a resettlement policy framework (see paras. 25-30) that covers the
following:
(a) The resettlement plan or resettlement policy framework includes measures to ensure
that the displaced persons are
(i)
Informed about their options and rights pertaining to resettlement;
(ii)
Consulted on, offered choices among, and provided with technically and
economically feasible resettlement alternatives; and
9. Where there are adverse indirect social or economic impacts, it is good practice for the borrower to undertake a
social assessment and implement measures to minimize and mitigate adverse economic and social impacts,
particularly upon poor and vulnerable groups. Other environmental, social, and economic impacts that do not
result from land taking may be identified and addressed through environmental assessments and other project
reports and instruments.
10.
This policy does not apply to restrictions of access to natural resources under community-based projects,
i.e. where the community using the resources decides to restrict access to these resources, provided that an
assessment satisfactory to the Bank establishes that the community decision-making process is adequate, and
that it provides for identification of appropriate measures to mitigate adverse impacts, if any, on the vulnerable
members of the community. This policy also does not cover refugees from natural disasters, war, or civil strife
(see OP/BP 8.50, Emergency Recovery Assistance).
11.
For purposes of this policy, "involuntary" means actions that may be taken without the displaced person's
informed consent or power of choice.
12.
"Land" includes anything growing on or permanently affixed to land, such as buildings and crops. This
policy does not apply to regulations of natural resources on a national or regional level to promote their
sustainability, such as watershed management, groundwater management, fisheries management, etc. The policy
also does not apply to disputes between private parties in land titling projects, although it is good practice for the
borrower to undertake a social assessment and implement measures to minimize and mitigate adverse social
impacts, especially those affecting poor and vulnerable groups.
40
(iii) Provided prompt and effective compensation at full replacement cost¹³ for
losses of assets 14 attributable directly to the project.
(b) If the impacts include physical relocation, the resettlement plan or resettlement
policy framework includes measures to ensure that the displaced persons are
(i)
Provided assistance (such as moving allowances) during relocation; and
(ii)
Provided with residential housing, or housing sites, or, as required,
agricultural sites for which a combination of productive potential, locational
advantages, and other factors is at least equivalent to the advantages of the
old site. 15
(c) Where necessary to achieve the objectives of the policy, the resettlement plan or
resettlement policy framework also include measures to ensure that displaced
persons are
(i) Offered support after displacement, for a transition period, based on a
reasonable estimate of the time likely to be needed to restore their livelihood
and standards of living; 16 and
(ii) Provided with development assistance in addition to compensation measures
described in paragraph 6(a) (iii), such as land preparation, credit facilities,
training, or job opportunities.
10. The implementation of resettlement activities is linked to the implementation of the
investment component of the project to ensure that displacement or restriction of access
does not occur before necessary measures for resettlement are in place. For impacts
covered in para. 3(a) of this policy, these measures include provision of compensation
and of other assistance required for relocation, prior to displacement, and preparation
13. "Replacement cost" is the method of valuation of assets that helps determine the amount sufficient to replace
lost assets and cover transaction costs. In applying this method of valuation, depreciation of structures and assets
should not be taken into account (for a detailed definition of replacement cost, see Annex A, footnote 1). For
losses that cannot easily be valued or compensated for in monetary terms (e.g., access to public services,
customers, and suppliers; or to fishing, grazing, or forest areas), attempts are made to establish access to
equivalent and culturally acceptable resources and earning opportunities. Where domestic law does not meet the
standard of compensation at full replacement cost, compensation under domestic law is supplemented by
additional measures necessary to meet the replacement cost standard. Such additional assistance is distinct from
resettlement assistance to be provided under other clauses of para. 6.
14. If the residual of the asset being taken is not economically viable, compensation and other resettlement
assistance are provided as if the entire asset had been taken.
15. The alternative assets are provided with adequate tenure arrangements. The cost of alternative residential
housing, housing sites, business premises, and agricultural sites to be provided can be set off against all or part
of the compensation payable for the corresponding asset lost.
16. Such support could take the form of short-term jobs, subsistence support, salary maintenance or similar
arrangements
41
and provision of resettlement sites with adequate facilities, where required. In
particular, taking of land and related assets may take place only after compensation has
been paid and, where applicable, resettlement sites and moving allowances have been
provided to the displaced persons. For impacts covered in para. 3(b) of this policy, the
measures to assist the displaced persons is implemented in accordance with the plan of
action as part of the project (see para. 30).
11. Preference should be given to land-based resettlement strategies for displaced persons
whose livelihoods are land-based. These strategies may include resettlement on public
land (see footnote 1 above), or on private land acquired or purchased for resettlement.
Whenever replacement land is offered, resettles' are provided with land for which a
combination of productive potential, locational advantages, and other factors is at least
equivalent to the advantages of the land taken. If land is not the preferred option of the
displaced persons, the provision of land would adversely affect the sustainability of a
park or protected area, 17 or sufficient land is not available at a reasonable price, non-
land-based options built around opportunities for employment or self-employment
should be provided in addition to cash compensation for land and other assets lost. The
lack of adequate land must be demonstrated and documented to the satisfaction of the
Bank.
12. Payment of cash compensation for lost assets may be appropriate where (a) livelihoods
are land-based but the land taken for the project is a small fraction 18 of the affected asset
and the residual is economically viable; (b) active markets for land, housing, and labor
exist, displaced persons use such markets, and there is sufficient supply of land and
housing; or (c) livelihoods are not land-based. Cash compensation levels should be
sufficient to replace the lost land and other assets at full replacement cost in local
markets.
13. For impacts covered under para. 3(a) of this policy, the Bank also requires the
following:
(a) Displaced persons and their communities, and any host communities receiving
them, are provided timely and relevant information, consulted on resettlement
options, and offered opportunities to participate in planning, implementing, and
monitoring resettlement. Appropriate and accessible grievance mechanisms are
established for these groups.
(b) In new resettlement sites or host communities, infrastructure and public services are
provided as necessary to improve, restore, or maintain accessibility and levels of
service for the displaced persons and host communities. Alternative or similar
resources are provided to compensate for the loss of access to community resources
(such as fishing areas, grazing areas, fuel, or fodder).
17. See OP 4.04, Natural Habitats.
18. As a general principle, this applies if the land taken constitutes less than 20% of the total productive area.
42
(c) Patterns of community organization appropriate to the new circumstances are based
on choices made by the displaced persons. To the extent possible, the existing
social and cultural institutions of resettles and any host communities are preserved
and resettles" preferences with respect to relocating in preexisting communities and
groups are honored.
43