Nationally Determined Contribution Information Management System Upgrade (NDC‑IMS upgrade)

Climate Change and Development Authority (CCDA)

and 

Regional Pacific NDC Hub, 
GIZ, 
Pacific Community (SPC), 
UNDP Climate Promise

Introduction

This solution, Nationally Determined Contribution Information Management System Upgrade (NDC‑IMS upgrade) addresses natural catastrophe through public private partnerships in Papua New Guinea between Climate Change and Development Authority (CCDA), Regional Pacific NDC Hub, GIZ, Pacific Community (SPC), and UNDP Climate Promise. The program was implemented in 2021 and focuses on collaboration and raising awareness.

Description

The Nationally Determined Contribution Information Management System Upgrade (NDC‑IMS upgrade) in Papua New Guinea is an initiative led by the Climate Change and Development Authority (CCDA) to enhance the country's climate transparency and NDC implementation. The upgrade focuses on improving the monitoring, reporting, and verification (MRV) systems to track and report on quantitative mitigation and adaptation targets as part of the Enhanced Transparency Framework under the Paris Agreement. The initiative is supported by the Regional Pacific NDC Hub and other international partners, aiming to prepare for the first Biennial Transparency Report (BTR1) and align with sectoral roadmaps, particularly in AFOLU and REDD+.

Key Highlights

The NDC‑IMS upgrade integrates sectoral monitoring with national reporting, supports iterative updates of the NDC Implementation Plan, and aligns with new quantitative adaptation targets. It features deep integration with AFOLU/REDD+ MRV and land-use governance, and coordination via the Regional Pacific NDC Hub for targeted technical assistance. The system tracks indicators such as renewable energy generation, land-use emissions, and adaptation metrics across agriculture, health, and transport sectors.

Results

The initiative has completed in-country support for the 2020 Enhanced NDC review, conducted a gap analysis of adaptation policies, finalized quantifiable adaptation targets, and strengthened frameworks for land use governance, reporting, and monitoring. The NDC Implementation Plan is prepared and updated annually, with active preparation for NDC 3.0 and BTR1 by 2025.

Contact Information

Name: Ms. Luanne Losi-Yawingu, 
Position:Regional Pacific NDC Hub Focal Point (PNG); Manager, CCDA Adaptation Branch, Adaptation & Projects Division, 
Company:Regional Pacific NDC Hub 
Email: [email protected]; [email protected], 
Contact Number: +675 7226 7020
, 
Organization: Regional Pacific NDC Hub Office (Suva, Fiji), 
Email: [email protected], 
Contact Number: (679) 337 9480