Drainage Upgrading Projects, FY2021–FY2023 tranche

PUB, Singapore’s National Water Agency, 
Ministry of Sustainability and the Environment (MSE), 
National Climate Change Secretariat (NCCS)

and 

SUEZ Digital Solutions

Introduction

This solution, Drainage Upgrading Projects, FY2021–FY2023 tranche addresses natural catastrophe through public private partnerships in Singapore between PUB, Singapore’s National Water Agency, Ministry of Sustainability and the Environment (MSE), National Climate Change Secretariat (NCCS), and SUEZ Digital Solutions. The program was implemented in 2021 and focuses on collaboration, leveraging tech, and regulation.

Description

The Drainage Upgrading Projects, FY2021–FY2023 tranche, are part of Singapore's national flood resilience strategy led by PUB. These projects focus on reducing pluvial flood risks in the urbanized city through targeted upgrades of drainage infrastructure, operational optimization using the Source-Pathway-Receptor (SPR) approach, and digital monitoring. The initiative is supported by regulatory measures and involves collaboration with technology partners to enhance flood protection and water management.

Key Highlights

The initiative employs the SPR approach, combining structural upgrades with operational intelligence and digital solutions. It emphasizes co-responsibility enforced by law, integrates reservoirs and barrages within the water system, and achieves extreme land-use efficiency in a dense city. The projects are part of a broader climate adaptation agenda, including long-term coastal protection.

Results

Flood-prone areas in Singapore have been reduced from approximately 3,200 hectares in the 1970s to less than 25 hectares today. The projects have contributed to localized flood management, with flooding generally subsiding within an hour. In January 2025, only one flood incident was reported during two monsoon surges, illustrating ongoing challenges but limited extent and duration.

Contact Information

Name: Ms Adeline Aw, 
Position:Divisional Director (Water & Food Policy), 
Company:Ministry of Sustainability and the Environment (MSE) 
Email: adeline_aw@mse.gov.sg, 
Contact Number: +65 6731-9885
, 
Name: Mr Benedict Chia, 
Position:Director-General, 
Company:National Climate Change Secretariat (NCCS) 
Email: Benedict_CHIA@pmo.gov.sg, 
Contact Number: +65 8764-1092
, 
Organization: PUB, Singapore’s National Water Agency, 
Email: pub_qsm@pub.gov.sg, 
Contact Number: 1800-2255-782 (24-hour Call Centre); Alt: +65 6521-6470