SFG3118 V4
Public Disclosure Authorized
даз
MDF
MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT FUND OF GEORGIA
83603032960 8563001563306 30680
Sub-Project: Construction of Tourism-related Small Size Structures on Central
Park and Lake "Tsivi" Territories in Tskaltubo Town
Municipality: Tskaltubo Municipality
Public Disclosure Authorized
Environmental Screening and
Environmental Management Plan
World Bank Financed
Second Regional Development Project
Environmental Screening and Classification
The proposed sub-project (SP) envisages construction of small size structures for arrangement of light
tourist infrastructure and development of recreational zone on Central Park and Lake "Tsivi" territories.
The SP includes:
Construction of Tskaltubo resort management office - the building in the vicinity of #7 Rustaveli Str.
in Tskaltubo on a vacant land plot owned by municipality. The building is a three-storey structure
with attic. At the second and third floors there are envisaged to be arranged the "French" balconies
with decorative wooden railing. At the main and back façade of the building the SP envisages
arranging of round shaped colons of concrete. The windows of the first floor are decorated with brick
arches. The construction nicely blends with the nearby buildings and landscape;
Arrangement of flowerpots and flowerbeds "pixel" - the SP envisages arrangement of reinforced
concrete quadratic flowerpots and paths. Plants will be placed in the flowerpots, trees will be
planted;
Arrangement of 3D garden - the park is designed for children. The SP envisages arrangement of
reinforced concrete circular flowerpots, where various species of plants will be placed. The SP also
envisages installation of slabs;
Construction of the 3 decorative fountains (two quadrangular and one circular) - fountains will be
interlinked with small connecting canals. Two fountains will be arranged with pergola;
Construction of decorative arches - arches of different shapes, with maximum height of 4.5 m, will be
alternately placed on the pedestrian path;
Construction of tennis courts - the SP envisages construction of 4 tennis courts - 2 with artificial and 2
with natural surface;
Construction of 2 open cafés:
The open café #1; will have a circular form and is installed by using cast in situ reinforced
concrete structure. The height of one-level structure will be 4.6 m with 342m² area. Reinforced
concrete slabs will be installed as well.
Open cafe #2 will have a round shape, metallic columns, roof, floor and cafe will be faced with
wood. The height of one-level structure will be 5 m with 56m² area.
Construction of the Passages #1 and #2 - Passages will represent wooden structures roofed with the
metal plates and will be used for walking in bad weather. Recreation facilities will be arranged inside.
Passages will be extended over the channel creates a pleasant relaxing environment;
Construction of Amphitheater (an open-air venue used for entertainment and performance) -
amphitheater will consist of nine levels with the maximal size of 48 m length and 21.5 m width. The
scene will be covered with semi-dome light structure and will entered the lake at 14 m with the semi-
round shape of 10 m;
Construction of Café - cafe will be located in the North part of the Lake and represents in-situ
reinforced concrete structure of the following sizes 39.9 m length and 14 m width;
Construction of Café-peer - the building will represent in-situ reinforced concrete structure that is
located in the North part of "Tsivi" Lake. It will enter the lake and end with a triangular platform,
sides will be equilateral, of 14 m. There are to be arranged the boards and steel railing;
Construction of boat peer - it will be arranged in "Tsivi" Lake at the right bank of the lake. It is in-situ
reinforced concrete structure of 18 m length and 3.6 m width. Along the bank there is to be arranged
as well the reinforced concrete pier platforms of 23.2 length and 3 m width. The pier will be faced
with plank;
Construction of playground for kids - playground for kids will include fountains and will be arranged
by in-situ reinforced concrete with a plank around it;
Construction of public toilet and shower:
The shower and the toilet will be arranged near the playground. The shower will have 9
operating units and the toilet will have 8 operating units. The building will be in-situ reinforced
concrete structure.
Two square shaped toilets will be located at the adjacent territory of Lake Tsivi. The toilet
building will be constructed using metal galvanized plates and lustrous organic glass. Sewerage
system of toilets will be connected to the Tskaltubo Town's sewage network.
Construction of pedestrian bridges #1 and #2 - the bridges of 18.6m length and 2.5m width will be
identical and represent the metal structure with in-situ reinforced concrete abutments.
(A) IMPACT IDENTIFICATION
Has the subproject a tangible impact on the
The SP has tangible positive social impact.
environment?
What are the significant beneficial and adverse
The SP has a long term positive impact on the
environmental effects of the subproject?
environment through improving living conditions
of the local population. Arrangement of new infra
structure will Improve the tourist services of the
city and attract the tourists, which will improve
quality of life and optimize the social and
economic development.
The expected negative environmental and social
impacts are likely to be short term and typical for
small to medium scale rehabilitation works: noise,
dust, vibration, and emissions from the operation
of construction machinery; generation of
construction waste; disruption of traffic and
pedestrian access.
Does the subproject have any significant potential
The long term positive social impact will be
impact on the local or affected communities?
beneficial.
Temporary positive impacts include short-term
employment of local population in construction
activities and increased earnings in services in the
vicinity of the construction sites.
The long term positive social impact will be
beneficial (improvement of local population living
conditions and growth of tourist flow, attraction of
private sector investment in tourism infrastructure
(hotels, bars, restaurants, shopping,
entertainment, etc.) employment of local
population).
Negative impacts are short term and limited to the
construction site. They are related to the possible
disturbance described above.
What impact has the subproject on the human
The long term impact of the improved tourist
health?
services will improve quality of life and optimize
the social development.
Minor negative impacts are related to dust,
emissions, noise and vibration during construction
period.
(B) MITIGATION MEASURES
What alternatives to the subproject design have
To improve the tourist services in Tskaltubo and
been considered and what mitigation measures are
make the town more comfortable and attractive
proposed?
for tourists several alternatives have been
considered Under the SP.
The expected negative impacts of the
construction phase can be easily mitigated by
demarcation of the construction site, traffic
management, good maintenance of the
construction machinery, observance of the
established working hours, and well organized
disposal of waste to the formally agreed sites.
What lessons from the previous similar subprojects
N/A
have been incorporated into the project design?
Have concerned communities been involved and
Tskaltubo population was informed about the
have their interests and knowledge been adequately
upcoming urban regeneration plans in a meeting
held in Tskaltubo Governor's office in town
taken into consideration in subproject preparation?
Tskaltubo (05.06.2012) and generated positive
reaction of the beneficiary community.
Draft EMP was disclosed on the web-site of MDF.
Hard copies of the document was available at the
MDF and Tskaltubo municipality governance.
Draft EMP was discussed on the public
consultation meeting on August 20, 2012.
(D) CATEGORIZATION AND CONCLUSION
Based on the screening outcomes,
subproject is classified as environmental Category
A
B
c
Conclusion of the environmental screening:
1. Subproject is declined
2. Subproject is accepted
If accepted, and based on risk assessment, subproject preparation requires:
Completion of the Environmental Management Checklist
for Small Construction and Rehabilitation Activities
Environmental Review, including development of
Environment Management Plan
Social and Cultural Resource Screening
Social safeguards screening information
Yes
No
1
Is the information related to the affiliation and ownership status of
the subproject site available and verifiable? (The screening cannot be
completed until this is available)
2
Will the project reduce other people's access to their economic
resources, such as land, pasture, water, public services or other
resources that they depend on?
3
Will the project result in resettlement of individuals or families or
require the acquisition of land (public or private, temporarily or
permanently) for its development?
4
Will the project result in the temporary or permanent loss of crops,
fruit trees and
Household infra-structure (such as granaries, outside toilets and
kitchens, etc)?
If answer to any above question (except question 1) is "Yes", then OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement is
applicable and mitigation measures should follow this OP/BP 4.12 and the Resettlement Policy
Framework
Cultural resources safeguard screening information
Yes
No
5
Will the project require excavation near any historical, archaeological
or cultural heritage site?
If answer to question 5 is "Yes", then OP/BP 4.11Physical Cultural Resources is applicable and possible
chance finds must be handled in accordance with OP/BP and relevant procedures provided in the
Environmental Management Framework.
PART A: GENERAL PROJECT AND SITE INFORMATION
INSTITUTIONAL & ADMINISTRATIVE
Country
Georgia
Subproject title
Construction of Tourism-related Small Size Structures on Central Park and Lake "Tsivi"
Territories in Tskaltubo Town
Scope of subproject
The proposed SP envisages construction of small size structures for arrangement of light
and activity
tourist infrastructure and development of recreational zone on Central Park and Lake
"Tsivi" territories.
The SP includes:
Construction of Tskaltubo resort management office - the building in the vicinity of
#7 Rustaveli Str. in Tskaltubo on a vacant land plot owned by municipality. The
building is a three-storey structure with attic. At the second and third floors there are
envisaged to be arranged the "French" balconies with decorative wooden railing. At
the main and back façade of the building the SP envisages arranging of round shaped
colons of concrete. The windows of the first floor are decorated with brick arches.
The construction nicely blends with the nearby buildings and landscape;
Arrangement of flowerpots and flowerbeds "pixel" - the SP envisages arrangement of
reinforced concrete quadratic flowerpots and paths. Plants will be placed in the
flowerpots, trees will be planted;
Arrangement of 3D garden - the park is designed for children. The SP envisages
arrangement of reinforced concrete circular flowerpots, where various species of
plants will be placed. The SP also envisages installation of slabs;
Construction of the 3 decorative fountains (two quadrangular and one circular) -
fountains will be interlinked with small connecting canals. Two fountains will be
arranged with pergola;
Construction of decorative arches - arches of different shapes, with maximum height
of 4.5 m, will be alternately placed on the pedestrian path;
Construction of tennis courts - the SP envisages construction of 4 tennis courts. 2 with
artificial and 2 with natural surface;
Construction of 2 open cafés:
The open café #1; will have a circular form and is installed by using cast in situ
reinforced concrete structure. The height of one-level structure will be 4.6 m
with 342m² area. Reinforced concrete slabs will be installed as well.
Open cafe #2 will have a round shape, metallic columns, roof, floor and cafe will
be faced with wood. The height of one-level structure will be 5 m with 56m²
area.
Construction of the Passages #1 and #2 - Passages will represent wooden structures
roofed with the metal plates and will be used for walking in bad weather. Recreation
facilities will be arranged inside. Passages will be extended over the channel creates a
pleasant relaxing environment;
Construction of Amphitheater (an open-air venue used for entertainment and
performance) - amphitheater will consist of nine levels with the maximal size of 48 m
length and 21.5 m width. The scene will be covered with semi-dome light structure
and will entered the lake at 14 m with the semi-round shape of 10 m;
Construction of Café - cafe will be located in the North part of the Lake and
represents in-situ reinforced concrete structure of the following sizes 39.9 m length
and 14 m width;
Construction of Café-peer - the building will represent in-situ reinforced concrete
structure that is located in the North part of "Tsivi" Lake. It will enter the lake and end
with a triangular platform, sides will be equilateral, of 14 m. There are to be arranged
the boards and steel railing;
Construction of boat peer - it will be arranged in "Tsivi" Lake at the right bank of the
lake. It is in-situ reinforced concrete structure of 18 m length and 3.6 m width. Along
the bank there is to be arranged as well the reinforced concrete pier platforms of
23.2 length and 3 m width. The pier will be faced with plank;
Construction of playground for kids - playground for kids will include fountains and
will be arranged by in-situ reinforced concrete with a plank around it;
Construction of public toilet and shower:
The shower and the toilet will be arranged near the playground. The shower will
have 9 operating units and the toilet will have 8 operating units. The building
will be in-situ reinforced concrete structure.
Two square shaped toilets will be located at the adjacent territory of Lake Tsivi.
The toilet building will be constructed using metal galvanized plates and lustrous
organic glass. Sewerage system of toilets will be connected to the Tskaltubo
Town's sewage network.
Construction of pedestrian bridges #1 and #2 - the bridges of 18.6m length and 2.5m
width will be identical and represent the metal structure with in-situ reinforced
concrete abutments.
Institutional
Project Team Leader
Safeguard Supervision
arrangements
Ahmed Eiweida
Darejan Kapanadze
WB
Implementation
Implementing EntitY:
Local Counterpart
Contractor
arrangements
MDF
Supervision
(Borrower)
Technical Supervisor
Ltd "Dagi"
"Eptisa Servicios de
Ingenieria S.L. (Spain)"
SITE DESCRIPTION
Name of site
Town Tskaltubo
Describe site location
The SP site is located in western Georgia,
Attachment 1 Minutes of
ImereTi Region, in Tskaltubo municipality.
Consultation Meeting
Access to the construction sites from Tblisi is
possible through Tbilisi-Kutaisi-Tskaltubo moto
Attachment 2. Agreement on
way and distance from Tbilisi is approximately
disposal of excess soil and tree
250 km.
cutting
Attachment 3. Agreement on
disposal of construction waste
Who owns the land?
Municipal Property
Description of
Tskaltubo is the town located in Western Georgia, Imereti Region.
geographic, physical,
Tskaltubo - the town in Georgia, an administrative center of Tskaltubo Municipality is
biological, geological,
located on the bank of the river Tskaltubostskali, at 120 m altitude above the sea level.
hydrographic and
It was established as the town in 1959 with the population of 16.8 thousand (as of
socio-economic
2002). It is well known as the balneotherapeutic health resort. Tskaltubo is located at 10
context
km distance from Kutaisi, and at 250 km distance from the Tbilisi City.
According to the geotechnical zoning, the survey area is within the bounds of the
Transcaucasian intermountain plain western molassic submersion zone (the Rioni
intermountain trough).
Tskaltubo is rich with hydro resources, the main artery of which is the river Rioni with its
tributaries - rivers Tskaltubo and Gubistskali.
Ground waters play immense role in formation of the engineering-geological conditions
of the survey area. Here several aqueous horizons and complexes are distinguished.
Tskaltubo is a resort, with focus on balneotherapy for circulatory, nervous, musculo-
skeletal, gynaecological and skin diseases, but since the 1970s its repertoire has included
"speleotherapy", in which the cool dust-free environment of local caves is said to benefit
pulmonary diseases (including bronchial asthma).
Number of the Tskaltubo Municipality population as of 2002-2006 is rather stable, it has
not significantly decreased, just by 0.9%, and according to the available data amounts
to 71381 (females - 37696; males -34193).
By economic activity, major part of the employed population is occupied in the following
sectors: agriculture, hunting and forestry (87.8%). In general, the number of
population employed during the period of 2002-2006 has negligibly increased.
Locations and
Average distance of transportation of local construction materials will be around 20 km.
distance for material
Water and power supply will be available at the construction site from the municipal
sourcing, especially
water and power supply systems.
aggregates, water,
stones?
Some of excavated material will be backfilled and some additional material will be
delivered from the licensed borrowing sites - estimated distance 5-10 km.
LEGISLATION
Identify national &
The subproject has been classified as low risk Category B according to the WB policies
local legislation &
and the EMF. Tskaltubo municipal authority approved the SP.
Georgian legislation does not require any type of environmental review, approval, or
permits that apply to
project activity
permitting for the SP. Though according to the national regulatory system,
(i)
works contractor must be licensed,
(ii)
construction materials must be obtained from licensed providers,
(iii)
if contractor wishes to open quarries or extract material from river bed (rather
than purchasing these materials from other providers), then the contractor must
obtain licenses for extraction,
(iv)
disposal of the construction waste into a landfill or permanent placement of
access inert material generated in the course of earth works in a selected
location must be approved by local (municipal) governing bodies in written.
GOST and SNIP norms must be adhered.
Licenses for extraction of inert material is not required because contractor is purchasing
inert material (sand) from external supplier.
The Copy of Letter of Tskaltubo municipality administration to ``Dagi`` Ltd on allocation
of place for disposal of excess soil (adjacent area to the building located at 34,
Chavchavadze street, Tskaltubo) and on consent on trees cutting is attached to this EMP.
The copy of Written agreement on disposal of construction waste on Kutaisi landfill
between ``Dagi`` Ltd and Solid Waste Management Company of Georgia Ltd. dated
September 15, 2014 is attached to this EMP
PUBLIC CONSULTATION
Identify when /
Tskaltubo population was informed about the upcoming urban regeneration plans in a
where the public
meeting held in Tskaltubo Governer's office in Tskaltubo (05.06.2012)) and generated
positive reaction of the beneficiary community.
consultation process
took place
Draft EMP was disclosed on the web-site of MDF. Hard copies of the document was
available at the MDF and Tskaltubo municipality governance.
Draft EMP was discussed on the public consultation meeting on August 20, 2012.
PART B: SAFEGUARDS INFORMATION
ENVIRONMENTAL /SOCIAL SCREENING
Activity/Issue
Status
Triggered Actions
A. Building rehabilitation
[] Yes
No
See Section A below
B.
New construction
Yes [] No
See Section A below
Will the site
C.
Individual wastewater treatment system
[] Yes
No
See Section B below
activity
D. Historic building(s) and districts
[] Yes
No
See Section c below
include/involve
E.
Acquisition of land¹
[] Yes
No
See Section D below
any of the
following?
F. Hazardous or toxic materials²
[] Yes
No
See Section E below
G. Impacts on forests and/or protected areas
[] Yes
No
See Section F below
H. Handling / management of medical waste
[] Yes
No
See Section G below
I.
Traffic and Pedestrian Safety
Yes [] No
See Section H below
1
Land acquisitions includes displacement of people, change of livelihood encroachment on private property this is to land that is purchased/transferred and affects people who are
living and/or squatters and/or operate a business (kiosks) on land that is being acquired.
2
Toxic / hazardous material includes but is not limited to asbestos, toxic paints, noxious solvents, removal of lead paint, etc.
PART C: MITIGATION MEASURES
ACTIVITY
PARAMETER
MITIGATION MEASURES CHECKLIST
General Conditions
Notification and Worker
(a) The local construction and environment inspectorates and communities have been notified of upcoming activities
Safety
(b) The public has been notified of the works through appropriate notification in the media and/or at publicly accessible sites
(including the site of the works)
(c) All legally required permits have been acquired for construction and/or rehabilitation
(d) The Contractor formally agrees that all work will be carried out in a safe and disciplined manner designed to minimize
impacts on neighboring residents and environment.
(e) Workers' PPE will comply with international good practice (always hardhats, as needed masks and safety glasses, harnesses
and safety boots)
(f) Appropriate signposting of the sites will inform workers of key rules and regulations to follow.
General Rehabilitation and
Air Quality
(a) During interior demolition debris-chutes shall be used above the first floor
/or Construction Activities
(b) Demolition debris shall be kept in controlled area and sprayed with water mist to reduce debris dust
(c) During pneumatic drilling/wall destruction dust shall be suppressed by ongoing water spraying and/or installing dust screen
enclosures at site
(d) The surrounding environment (sidewalks, roads) shall be kept free of debris to minimize dust
(e) There will be no open burning of construction / waste material at the site
(f) There will be no excessive idling of construction vehicles at sites
Noise
(a) Construction noise will be limited to restricted times agreed to in the permit
(b) During operations the engine covers of generators, air compressors and other powered mechanical equipment shall be
closed, and equipment placed as far away from residential areas as possible
Water Quality
(a) The site will establish appropriate erosion and sediment control measures such as e.g. hay bales and / or silt fences to
prevent sediment from moving off site and causing excessive turbidity in nearby streams and rivers.
Waste management
(a) Waste collection and disposal pathways and sites will be identified for all major waste types expected from demolition and
construction activities.
(b) Mineral construction and demolition wastes will be separated from general refuse, organic, liquid and chemical wastes by
on-site sorting and stored in appropriate containers.
(c) Construction waste will be collected and disposed properly by licensed collectors
(d) The records of waste disposal will be maintained as proof for proper management as designed.
(e) Whenever feasible the contractor will reuse and recycle appropriate and viable materials (except asbestos)
Traffic and Pedestrian Safety
Direct or indirect hazards to
(a) In compliance with national regulations the contractor will insure that the construction site is properly secured and
public traffic and
construction related traffic regulated. This includes but is not limited to
pedestrians by construction
Signposting, warning signs, barriers and traffic diversions: site will be clearly visible and the public warned of all
potential hazards
activities
Traffic management system and staff training, especially for site access and near-site heavy traffic. Provision of safe
passages and crossings for pedestrians where construction traffic interferes.
Adjustment of working hours to local traffic patterns, e.g. avoiding major transport activities during rush hours or times
of livestock movement
Active traffic management by trained and visible staff at the site, if required for safe and convenient passage for the
public.
Ensuring safe and continuous access to office facilities, shops and residences during renovation activities, if the
buildings stay open for the public.
PART D: MONITORING MANAGEMENT PLAN
What
Where
How
When
Why
Who
Activity
(Is the parameter to be
(Is the parameter
(Is the parameter
(Define the frequency /
(Is the parameter being
(Is responsible for
monitored?)
to be monitored?)
to be monitored?)
or continuous?)
monitored?)
monitoring?)
CONSTRUCTION PHASE
Supply with
Purchase of construction
In the supplier's
Verification of
During conclusion of the
To ensure technical
MDF,
construction
materials from the officially
office or
documents
supply contracts
reliability and safety of
materials
registered suppliers
warehouse
infrastructure
Construction supervisor
Transportation
Technical condition of
Construction site
Inspection
Unannounced
Limit pollution of soil and
MDF,
of construction
vehicles and machinery
inspections during work
air from emissions;
materials and
hours and beyond
Construction supervisor,
waste
Confinement and protection
Limit nuisance to local
of truck loads with lining
communities from noise
Traffic Police
Movement of
and vibration;
construction
Respect of the established
machinery
hours and routes of
Minimize traffic
transportation
disruption.
13
What
Where
How
When
Why
Who
Activity
(Is the parameter to be
(Is the parameter
(Is the parameter
(Define the frequency /
(Is the parameter being
(Is responsible for
monitored?)
to be monitored?)
to be monitored?)
or continuous?)
monitored?)
monitoring?)
Earth works
Temporary storage of
Construction site
Inspection
In the course of earth
Prevent pollution of the
MDF,
excavated material in the
works
construction site and its
pre-defined and agreed
surroundings with
Construction supervisor
upon locations;
construction waste;
Backfilling of the excavated
Prevent damage and loss
material and/or its disposal
of physical cultural
to the formally designated
resources
locations;
In case of chance finds
immediate suspension of
works, notification of the
Ministry of Culture and
Monument Protection, and
resumption of works
exclusively upon formal
consent of the Ministry.
What
Where
How
When
Why
Who
Activity
(Is the parameter to be
(Is the parameter
(Is the parameter
(Define the frequency /
(Is the parameter being
(Is responsible for
monitored?)
to be monitored?)
to be monitored?)
or continuous?)
monitored?)
monitoring?)
Sourcing of
Purchase of material from
Borrowing areas
Inspection of
In the course of material
Limiting erosion of slopes
MDF,
inert material
the existing suppliers if
documents
extraction
and degradation of
feasible;
ecosystems and
Construction supervisor
Inspection of
landscapes;
Obtaining of extraction
works
license by the works
Limiting erosion of river
contract and strict
banks, water pollution
compliance with the license
with suspended particles
conditions;
and disruption of aquatic
life.
Terracing of the borrow
area, backfilling to the
exploited areas of the
borrow site, and landscape
harmonization;
Excavation of river gravel
and sand from outside of the
water stream, arrangement
of protective barriers of
gravel between excavation
area and the water stream,
and no entry of machinery
into the water stream.
Generation of
Temporary storage of
Construction site;
Inspection
Periodically during
Prevent pollution of the
MDF,
construction
construction waste in
construction and upon
construction site and
waste
especially allocated areas;
Waste disposal site
complaints
nearby area with solid
Construction supervisor
waste
Timely disposal of waste to
the formally designated
locations
What
Where
How
When
Why
Who
Activity
(Is the parameter to be
(Is the parameter
(Is the parameter
(Define the frequency /
(Is the parameter being
(Is responsible for
monitored?)
to be monitored?)
to be monitored?)
or continuous?)
monitored?)
monitoring?)
Traffic
Installation of traffic
At and around the
Inspection
In the course of
Prevent traffic accidents;
MDF,
disruption and
limitation/diversion signage;
construction site
construction works
limitation of
Limit nuisance to local
Construction supervisor
pedestrian
Storage of construction
residents
access
materials and temporary
placement of construction
waste in a way preventing
congestion of access roads
Workers'
Provision of uniforms and
Construction site
Inspection
Unannounced
Limit occurrence of on-
MDF,
health and
safety gear to workers;
inspections in the course
the-job accidents and
safety
of work
emergencies
Construction supervisor
Informing of workers and
personnel on the personal
safety rules and instructions
for operating
machinery/equipment, and
strict compliance with these
rules/instructions
OPERATION PHASE
Regular
Effective contractual
Central Park in
Inspection
Throughout operation of
Prevent malfunctioning of
Tskaltubo municipality
operation and
arrangements with private
Tskaltubo
the Park
public WCs and disruption
maintenance
operators of the light tourist
of water supply.
of the provided
infrastructure in place;
light
Prevent deterioration and
infrastructure
Good technical condition of
littering of the Park.
the provided light tourist
infrastructure;
Waste management.
Attachment 1: Minutes of the Public Consultation Meeting
Public Consultation Meeting Minutes on Environmental Management Plans
For Urban Development Sub-Projects in Tskaltubo
Tskaltubo
August 20, 2012
In order to discuss the environmental documentation prepared for the projects envisgaed under the Imereti
Regional Development Project Tskaltubo Urban Development Sub-Project, on August 20, 2012 a meeting
was held at the Tskaltubo Municipality Conference Hall.
The inhabitants were informed about the public consultation in advance as the respective Statements were
placed at the information boards of Gamgeoba building.
At the meeting were discussed the works with regard to the project as well as the expected impacts on
environment and health of the people. There were discussed also the mitigation measures in order to
minimize the potential negative impacts in the process of the project implementation. The attendees were
informed about their rights and possible involvment in the construction process. In the process of the
discussions concerning the Environmental Management Plans, those present were enabled to pose
questions and express their critical attidtudes in order to influence the plan finalization process.
Public Consultation was attended by attorneys of the territorial entities of Tskaltubo Municipality and
representatives of population, as well as representatives of MDF.
Irakli Kaviladze, Environmental Consultant of the MDF presented to the attendees the draft Environmental
Management Plans (EMP) for the Tskaltubo Urban Development Sub-Project.
The meeting was opened by Nino Patarashvili, representative of the Municipal Development Fund of
Georgia, she informed the attendees of the meeting about importance of the Urban Development Project in
Tskaltubo in terms of improvement the social and economic conditions in the region and the Municipality.
At the meeting were discussed the works with regard to the project as well as the expected impacts on
environment and health of the people. There were discussed also the mitigation measures in order to
minimize the potential negative impacts in the process of the project implementation. The attendees were
informed about their rights and possible involvment in the construction process.
The following main topics were presneted during the meeting:
Brief description of existing situation;
Reviewing and analysis of design-construction solutions;
Analysis of the existing environmental condition on the project sites;
Evaluation and analysis of possible negative impact on environment;
Mitigation measures, Environmental Management and Monitoring;
Expected involvement of population in monitoring of construction process.
The presentation was folowed by debates. the Q&A session is given in annex in the form of the table #1.
Q&A session:
Question/Comment
Comments
Will the local population be employed?
The employment issue and employing of workers essential for the
project implementation will be carried out by the Contractor which
will be identified by the Bidding. According to the World Bank
requirements in the process of selecting the employees if the
qualification is equal, priority should be given to the local one.
What does the rehabilitation of the
Rehabilitation of the administrative buildings means restoration and
administrative buildings mean?
renovation of the facades of the above-mentioned buildings.
The project implementation area is
As we have already mentioned, the Tskaltubo project includes eight
only the Tskaltubo park or other areas
sub-projects, which are as follows:
will also be subject to rehabilitation?
Restoration of Existing Buildings and Small Size Pedestrian Bridges in
central part of Tskaltubo Town;
Construction of Destination Management Office and Tourism-related
Small Size Structures on Central Part, Park and Lake "Tsivi" Teritories
in Tskaltubo Town;
Rehabilitation of Water Supply and Sewerage System in central part
of Tskaltubo Town;
Rehabilitation of Road Pavement and Stormwater Drain System of
Circle Road in Tskaltubo Town;
Rehabilitation of Roads, Foot Paths and Stormwater Drain System of
Central Park and Lake "Tsivi" in Tskaltubo Town;
Arrangement of Irrigation System and Landscaping of Central Park
and Lake "Tsivi" Territory in Tskaltubo Town;
Rehabilitation of Lake "Tsivi" and Water Channels In Tskaltubo Town;
Rehabilitation of Outdoor Lightings of Circle Road, Central Park and
Lake "Tsivi" Territory in Tskaltubo Town.
List of attendees (interested population)
одубловов 36mgjo
J. cosagadomo
bsxsm
cosabfingos bos
J. bysming
20.08.2012 6.
#
bsbgmo gs ззьбо
bszm53sjjm обзатдзвоз
bymamfgms
1.
05/16/2020
577965511
hybrisocal Thank W:1/5
2.
Pa3ron
J.
551447244
1/21
270
3.
3Pm 76MS "6"
J. I whingml
5959596 2n
344>
J. W26
4.
Gznse 61kosghndn
4. 2r 3cg W15
555509100
9.6f
5.
nhosen 5.5,30
J. j wf
595959384
X
6.
Enghod Joghzo6ndy
5Mm againl 1.106/19
591221592
& 2nymg
7.
54355334 log. 15twbyh
30 Jahns
1.6y zy Longst of 1/34
598 290928
a
#
boogmo gs 83s(mo
bszm5gsjjm общетдзвоз
8.
5(5)n3
d. y.853d 3-6 Infost
sebs
598339686
9.
STATES Rbund,
3 Mgar3d
2528- Wgre' WDL.
d.N41/19 577.600802
2Rburs
10.
3.hood obozons
32030ml
of bys 50ytm
a
3063001. 193/mln
JN6 595959067
11.
myon Immmgj31
237.87
h.bn.
larget
595959943
12.
non 50 5m5Js
by 2y6run 35232ml
I. Lmy.
in WH6
53893050
33ndpion 595-95-75-98
13.
Jogbob thighty
by sh.fip.
foyspyde higey the
3
3328/27
8cn.
14.
Goth 3.500,00
55- rtr
a togH rup
No. 9/16
Q fill
15.
6n6m S-Gubz
Insel Jyhonrol
557-33-8388
abof
1-8-bs
16.
BUON 736gnhoh
3503gma, Anongh. the
systems
595908944
a. thy
17.
дуболи SUIU
200/ml Engel 2,746,m5
568-27-27-64.
2.17.4
1,00,6pm
#
boogmo gos азьбо
bszm5gsjjm обдттдзвоз
bymamfgms
18.
озогобель
577528158
Unl 3072156ml 2,003.00
as 2m th
19.
and
sympAd, 15mlysh @
10/2020 While
598 14 6839
office
20.
aster
3758441, 15mb/pl
jongrty
Pu 4301 73th WILLING 1040ml
598 334511
off.
21.
C 1
26-6m3,mg 2
J-
598588581
m. dries
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
Attachment 2: Letter of Tskaltubo municipality administration to ``Dagi`` Ltd on allocation of place for
disposal of excess soil (adjacent area to the building located at 34, Chavchavadze street, Tskaltubo) and
consent on the removal of trees
ssazymas
4500 J. J. №25, III 22-28-00, 22-26-
№ 2208
" 15" 5mga8ymn 2012 B.
236 "cosgn"-b
80gm5 anbjoem
дузтбт доблост,
опрздбо 2012 fimals №3/1-348 Буботов mmageman norber d.
35m380 gos "3030 goob" amforts (os
asamymozes, 3035m8g80, mmd bs88g5g8mm
3sazym8s 5m smole ofama
8m5g880 amogrists bygon (os 5(5)03
ms3 aggbys formsfols 5m 6mmm bujozons angs
(8mg5g) counysments d. 7037035000 fights №34
вобов
M
lifely
mossm
Attachment 3: Written agreement on disposal of construction waste on Kutaisi landfill between ``Dagi`` Ltd and
Solid Waste Management Company of Georgia Ltd., dated September 15, 2014.
by №95
d. moogobo
15.09.2014
a.3.b. agemo Быбвябздов damagob jm83sbas", dobo
30mm30 bobom. Fexegomeno
group abmo3 gs 336 "gazo" dobo dobgoon bobom, дутбов
abmog. amfagen go before b Fabggoob ag-8
Imbgrob ag-7 3y6d3ob œgòg6
Ingbono 1. by bazabo
1.1 ammbergbobs go
2014 Venob 10 shogmob №1-5/24 go 2014 Fenob 08 oggobob №8-m
150 (sb 8mbs
go asbowb (808s,
обдовуто dobags go
I. Jymsobob agsmn
Anghmo 2. 30mm3gdo
2.1 gs bacobboobag
ga go Isborb
Быбвябов (dof's, dofsbanggo, Isbama go bbgs)"
2.2
2014
Femob 31
2.2 go
drybono 3. absmgns
3.1
3.1.1 go bamobbosbog 1.1 dybendo
3.1.2 30fggobsb go
бадбозубо Быбвубов
3shmsghgdols 80b60m.
3.2 Togangds >J3b:
3.2.1 disambergerb
génergance
322 dmombmgerb gs(33.
33
33.1 &
3.3.2 granghoom 8ysmo
Быбвубов bsbabder go
@s330m.
@sa33390
2.3L
3.4 >J3b:
3.4.1 8moobergemb
3.4.2 306mdgdob
3.4.3 dogm ob
зетьдот,
3.4.4 smoot go
bajobero
4. go
4.1
4.2 I (grom) 8mbs go Asbons6
(dofs, обзбоджо Isbagns go bb30)" Jejongboun
dysmo Быбвябздов 356mszbgdob deidbaby
10 (smo) moob ggo-b hangmoon.
dogn 30bofago dysmn
Быбвябздов
hamhgbob beginess
43 Вабозвов mahks haðabym
(o)
stools 10 (smn)
4.4 doges
degangogdob Эздедз дьмядздо SQ33596 30V330b doggds-
ofob, ms3 doges Базово
4.5 дьтошь 80V350b stob
byoob sparb googramob бузотбуто
odgergmob зотбзо
dogbono 5. amfaggabob gsms gs dobo Fgbo
5.1 by damado aggob Absongers doges dobo
gs 80gm borgensco as
Хдбизбы 2014 Foob
5.2 om
dryboma 6. bagages brombadob Amzgamgs
@ decrob
bagager Abserve
borger bagages beforbb
забоводнодь
If
2.2/-
degbono 7.
7.1 anybemo go gobsmon dob
72 by aggshs Agndengos 8mbggb
8bmgmg absergors oyes 8y3nm
замозддудь dags omo
7.3 by 2 (mm) mahadama
dognols afms formary ghoby.
beginn дбою obsbgos
Joybonn 8. absergors majgobo8gdo go
asts дугто быбвабдовь jma3360s", dob:
№12, зъдвоуто dob: d- shs
d N10 ag-4 jmgo: 404942470, baðabjer
дьбзо: bb mondobo 336jo", definds VEHOO: TBCBGE22, абзамодов 6m8gero:
GE51TB7161936080100005.
STATE
MISSEYS
zommgo
* 404942478
ast d. moomobols
8003330806 J.,No29, ag-2 & ag-3 3m63 jergen: 205022134.
$380*
byman
2.3/m
*
GEOR
STOTE