USAID’s Tayar—Improved Disaster Risk Management Project (Tayar Nepal)

National Disaster and Risk Reduction Management Agency (NDRRMA)

and 

United States Agency for International Development (USAID), 
World Vision International Nepal (WVI)

and 

DAI, 
Thulo.Com, 
EMERGE

Introduction

This solution, USAID’s Tayar—Improved Disaster Risk Management Project (Tayar Nepal) addresses natural catastrophe through public private partnerships in Nepal between National Disaster and Risk Reduction Management Agency (NDRRMA), United States Agency for International Development (USAID), World Vision International Nepal (WVI), DAI, Thulo.Com, and EMERGE. The program was implemented in 2019 and focuses on collaboration, raising awareness, and leveraging tech.

Description

USAID’s Tayar Nepal is a five-year initiative aimed at strengthening Nepal's disaster risk management systems at both national and municipal levels. The project focuses on enhancing institutional capacity, policy reform, risk-sensitive land-use planning, community preparedness, and resilience through targeted grants. It addresses multiple hazards including earthquakes, floods, landslides, fires, and disease outbreaks, aiming to improve national preparedness and municipal resilience.

Key Highlights

Tayar Nepal supports the National Disaster and Risk Reduction Management Agency (NDRRMA) to become fully functional, advances national disaster simulations and response technologies, and establishes a National Disaster Training Academy. It also builds municipal capacity for risk-informed planning and implements community-based adaptation and risk mitigation measures. The project includes private-sector partnerships to foster resilience among women-led businesses and deploys digital tools like the 'Ma Ta Chhu Tayar' app for risk management.

Results

More than 716,000 people reached through preparedness and response activities. The project facilitated training for 129 participants on disaster risk reduction and business management, connected 48 women producers to e-commerce platforms, and recorded over 500 downloads of the 'Ma Ta Chhu Tayar' app.

Contact Information

Name: Ram N. Gurung, 
Position:Acquisition and Assistance Specialist, 
Company:United States Agency for International Development (USAID) 
Email: rgurung@usaid.gov, 
Contact Number: +977-1-4234339
, 
Organization: World Vision International Nepal, 
Email: info_nepal@wvi.org, 
Contact Number: +977-1-5970877