Disaster Resilience Improvement Program (DRIP), 
Second Disaster Resilience Improvement Program (DRIP2)

Government of the Philippines, 
Department of Finance, 
State-Owned and Controlled Corporations (SOCCs), 
Local Government Units (LGUs)

and 

Asian Development Bank (ADB), 
Asia-Pacific Climate Finance Fund (ACliFF)

and 

Insurance market actors

Introduction

This solution, Disaster Resilience Improvement Program (DRIP), 
Second Disaster Resilience Improvement Program (DRIP2) addresses natural catastrophe through public private partnerships in Republic of the Philippines between Government of the Philippines, Department of Finance, State-Owned and Controlled Corporations (SOCCs), Local Government Units (LGUs), Asian Development Bank (ADB), Asia-Pacific Climate Finance Fund (ACliFF), and Insurance market actors. The program was implemented in 2020, 
2025 and focuses on collaboration, regulation, and raising awareness.

Description

The ADB-supported Disaster Resilience Improvement Programs (DRIP and DRIP2) in the Philippines are designed to enhance disaster risk financing through policy-based, multi-year contingent financing. These programs aim to integrate disaster risk reduction and management (DRRM) with public financial management (PFM), strengthen the role of state-owned corporations in disaster response, and introduce a city-level parametric disaster insurance scheme. The initiative addresses the Philippines' high multi-hazard risk profile by providing pre-arranged financing and integrated governance to mitigate fiscal shocks and safeguard livelihoods.

Key Highlights

The programs feature a replenishable contingent facility and the first city-level parametric insurance scheme in Southeast Asia. They promote voluntary city participation with budget-funded premiums and a scale-up pathway for city involvement. The programs also emphasize gender, disability, and social inclusion (GEDSI) integration and are anchored in national PFM reforms.

Results

DRIP1 completed institutional reforms by 2023, establishing a pathway for city parametric insurance with 145 eligible cities and 17 initial pilots. DRIP2 provides US$500 million for rapid response and reform deepening, addressing macroeconomic risks with average annual losses of ~US$857 million from earthquakes and ~US$2.6 billion from tropical cyclones.

Contact Information