Developing Climate Disaster Financing Framework and Parametric Insurance in Fiji (CDRFF and Parametric Micro‑Insurance)

Government of Fiji, 
Reserve Bank of Fiji (RBF)

and 

UNCDF/PICAP, 
UNDP, 
UNU‑EHS, 
India‑UN Partnership Fund, 
UNOSSC, 
InsuResilience Solutions Fund, 
Commonwealth Secretariat

and 

SUN Insurance, 
FijiCare Insurance, 
Tower Insurance

Introduction

This solution, Developing Climate Disaster Financing Framework and Parametric Insurance in Fiji (CDRFF and Parametric Micro‑Insurance) addresses natural catastrophe through public private partnerships in Republic of Fiji between Government of Fiji, Reserve Bank of Fiji (RBF), UNCDF/PICAP, UNDP, UNU‑EHS, India‑UN Partnership Fund, UNOSSC, InsuResilience Solutions Fund, Commonwealth Secretariat, SUN Insurance, FijiCare Insurance, and Tower Insurance. The program was implemented in 2020 and focuses on collaboration, accessibility, and leveraging tech.

Description

The Climate and Disaster Risk Financing Framework (CDRFF) and Parametric Micro‑Insurance initiative in Fiji is designed to provide rapid financial relief to vulnerable households and small enterprises affected by extreme weather events. This initiative, led by the Government of Fiji in collaboration with international and domestic partners, employs parametric insurance products that offer quick, rules-based payouts based on predefined weather triggers. The framework aims to enhance resilience against cyclones, floods, and droughts, integrating digital solutions for efficient delivery and focusing on inclusivity, particularly for women, persons with disabilities, and smallholder farmers.

Key Highlights

First Pacific parametric micro‑insurance product with VAT-exempt premiums and government-subsidized coverage for social welfare recipients. The initiative features rapid digital payouts, community co‑creation, and intentional gender and disability inclusion. It is integrated with Fiji's national financial inclusion strategy and involves South‑South learning with India. The framework is part of a larger national strategy linked to the InsuResilience Global Partnership action agenda.

Results

In the 2024/2025 period, 3,664 individuals were enrolled, with FJD 2.47 million in protection and over FJD 107,000 paid out to vulnerable communities. An early tranche saw 1,013 farmers receive FJD 201,000, with 74% of farmers affected, 40% women, and 24% people with disabilities. 87% of surveyed beneficiaries used payouts to restart livelihoods, with payouts occurring within approximately two weeks post-verification.

Contact Information

Name: Krishnan Narasimhan, 
Position:Lead Specialist and Programme Manager, Climate Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance (PICAP), 
Company:UNCDF/PICAP 
Email: krishnan.narasimhan@uncdf.org, 
Contact Number: Not publicly listed in cited sources
, 
Name: Praneel Pritesh, 
Position:Regional Technical Specialist, Pacific Insurance and Climate Adaptation Programme (PICAP), 
Company:UNDP 
Email: praneel.pritesh@undp.org, 
Contact Number: Not publicly listed in cited sources
, 
Name: Veima Bower, 
Position:Communications Associate, 
Company:UNCDF 
Email: veima.bower@uncdf.org, 
Contact Number: Not publicly listed in cited sources
, 
Name: Sheldon Chanel, 
Position:Communications Officer, 
Company:UNCDF/UNDP Pacific 
Email: sheldon.chanel@undp.org, 
Contact Number: Not publicly listed in cited sources
, 
Name: Dirk Wagener, 
Position:UN Resident Coordinator, 
Company:UN 
Email: dirk.wagener@un.org, 
Contact Number: Not publicly listed in cited sources