Infrastructure for Safer and Resilient Schools (ISRS) Project

Department of Education (DepEd), 
Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH), 
National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) Board

and 

World Bank (International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, IBRD)

Introduction

This solution, Infrastructure for Safer and Resilient Schools (ISRS) Project addresses natural catastrophe in Philippines between Department of Education (DepEd), Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH), National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) Board, World Bank (International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and IBRD). The program was implemented in 2025 and focuses on collaboration and raising awareness.

Description

The Infrastructure for Safer and Resilient Schools (ISRS) Project is a Philippine government initiative, financed by a World Bank loan, aimed at restoring and strengthening public-school infrastructure damaged by disasters. It focuses on building resilience into school facilities and their operation and maintenance systems to reduce future learning disruptions. The project targets schools affected by earthquakes and tropical cyclones from 2019–2023, prioritizing regions with the greatest infrastructure damage and risk.

Key Highlights

The ISRS Project employs a two-tiered civil works strategy, addressing both simple and complex infrastructure recovery needs. It includes quick-turnaround repairs and functional restoration, as well as structural rehabilitation and retrofitting of severely damaged buildings. The project also emphasizes institutional strengthening for operations and maintenance, updating DepEd’s O&M manual and tools to ensure resilience gains are preserved. Additionally, a dedicated Project Management Office and consultancy support are established for effective oversight and delivery.

Results

Cannot be determined.

Contact Information

Name: Mark Felsenthal, 
Position:World Bank Communications Contact (Washington), 
Company:World Bank (IBRD) 
Email: mfelsenthal@worldbank.org, 
Contact Number: +1 (202) 602-9673