89505
closure Authorized
HNP DISCUSSIONPAPER
Publ
Public Disclosure Authorized
HEALTH FINANCING IN VANUATU
Challenges and Options
lan Anderson
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
HNP
June 2013
HEALTH AND REPLATION
HEALTH FINANCING IN VANUATU
Challenges and Options
lan Anderson
June 2013
Health, Nutrition, and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper
This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population (HNP) Family of the
World Bank's Human Development Network (HDN). The papers in this series aim to
provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP topics to encourage
discussion and debate. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this
paper are entirely those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the
World Bank, to its affiliated organizations, or to members of its Board of Executive
Directors or the countries they represent. Citation and the use of material presented in this
series should take into account this provisional character.
For information regarding the HNP Discussion Paper Series, please contact the Editor,
Martin Lutalo at mlutalo@worldbank.org or Erika Yanick at eyanick@worldbank.org
© 2013 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW Washington, DC 20433
All rights reserved.
ii
Health, Nutrition, and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper
Health Financing in Vanuatu:
Challenges and Options
Ian Andersonᵃ
"Director, Ian Anderson Economics Pty Ltd., Canberra, Australia, and Centre for
International Health, Curtin University, Perth, Australia.
Abstract: Population growth, an unfinished agenda of communicable diseases and
maternal health and nutrition, and the rapid rise of Noncommunicable diseases are
putting increasing strain on not just the Ministry of Health budget, but also the broader
financial position of the government as a whole. These pressures are ultimately
financially unsustainable, given current and projected future economic conditions. But
many of the health burdens and costs can be avoided, or at least delayed, with good
primary and secondary prevention. There are practical options for making health
financing in Vanuatu more effective, efficient, equitable, affordable, and accountable.
Improving efficiency of public expenditure is key to achieving this.
Keywords: Health financing, Vanuatu, Noncommunicable diseases, efficiency.
Disclaimer: The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in the paper are
entirely those of the authors, and do not represent the views of the World Bank, its
Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.
Correspondence Details: Ian Anderson, 69 Blackwood Terrace, Holder, ACT, 2611
Australia; +61 (02) 6288 4989; e-mail: ian.anderson.economics@gmail.com: website:
http://ian-anderson-economics.com/.
iii
Table of Contents
FOREWORD
VI
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
VIII
ABBREVIATIONS
IX
GLOSSARY
X
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
XII
CHAPTER 1: CONTEXT AND PURPOSE OF THIS REPORT
1
CHAPTER 2: HEALTH OUTCOMES AND CHALLENGES IN VANUATU
5
CHAPTER 3: HEALTH-FINANCING TRENDS
16
CHAPTER 4: OPTIONS FOR HEALTH FINANCING
28
CONCLUSION
58
ANNEX 1: STATEMENT BY VANUATU MINISTRY OF HEALTH ON THE
CHALLENGES IT FACE
61
ANNEX 2: HEALTH EXPENDITURE STATISTICS FOR VANUATU
COMPARED TO OTHER LARGER PACIFIC ISLAND COUNTRIES, 2010
69
ANNEX 3: TEN LEADING CAUSES OF INEFFICIENCY IN HEALTH
FINANCING
70
REFERENCES
71
iv
FOREWORD
The government of Vanuatu, like other governments in the Pacific, is seeking to improve
the health outcomes of its citizens in ways that are financially efficient, effective,
equitable, and sustainable. This is an important challenge because, like other countries in
the Pacific, government finances (and delivers) the majority of health services. Growing
and changing demands for health care, particularly given the rapid rise of
noncommunicable diseases such as type 2 diabetes and hypertension, put financial
pressures not just on the Ministry of Health but on the overall national budget.
The World Bank was asked to assist the government of Vanuatu to assess the latest
financing pressures in the health sector and identify policy options to respond. An
independent economist consultant was appointed who undertook a series of interviews
and analysis in Vanuatu under the direction of Ms. Susan Ivatts, Task Team Leader,
World Bank. Early drafts were shared and discussed with the government of Vanuatu and
other key stakeholders, and revisions made to this report. The research and analysis was
made possible through financing provided by the Australian government's development
assistance program.
vi
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This report was prepared by Ian Anderson, Consultant Economist to the World Bank,
under the direction of Ms. Susan Ivatts, Task Team Leader and Senior Health Specialist,
the World Bank.
Helpful comments and inputs were received on earlier drafts from several sources. Mr.
Howard Aru, Director General, Ministry of Health and his team in the Ministry of Health
provided valuable comments and background data. David Knight, Economist, Poverty
Reduction and Economic Management, East Asia and the Pacific Region; and Tania
Dmytraczenko, Senior Economist, Human Development, Latin America and the
Caribbean Region, provided formal World Bank peer review comments. Mr. Nazzareno
Todini, former Public Financial Management Specialist, the World Bank, provided
analytical input; and Mr. Peter Wallace, Public Financial Management Specialist, the
World Bank, provided comments. Ms. Belynda McNaughton, First Secretary, Health and
Education; and Ms. Kendra Derosseau, Senior Program Manager, Health and Education,
both of the Australian High Commission, Port Vila, provided detailed comments. Dr.
Jacob Kool, Country Liaison Officer, WHO; and Dr. Rufina Latu, Technical Officer,
WHO, provided comments and insights.
A High-Level Health Partner Meeting was hosted by the government of Vanuatu in Port
Vila, Vanuatu, over the period April 11-12, 2013. This provided an opportunity to
present and discuss the draft findings of this report and to update data and strategies from
government and external partners. The high-level meeting was opened and attended in
part by Honorable Rialuth Serge Vohur, minister for health, government of Vanuatu, and
attended by all major national and international stakeholders.
The author is grateful to the World Bank for publishing this report as an HNP Discussion
Paper.
viii
ABBREVIATIONS
DFA
Direct funding agreement
GDP
Gross domestic product
GFATM
Global Fund to Fight AIDs, Tuberculosis and Malaria
HIV and AIDS
Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immunodeficiency
Syndrome
HRH
Human resources for health
IMF
International Monetary Fund
JPA
Joint partners agreement
NHA
National Health Accounts
MDG
Millennium Development Goal
MFEM
Ministry of Finance and Economic Management
MoH
Ministry of Health
MTEF
Medium-term expenditure framework
NCD
Noncommunicable disease
ODA
Official development assistance
OPD
Outpatients Department
PEN
Package of essential noncommunicable (PEN) disease interventions for
primary health care in low-resource settings
PPP
Purchasing power parity (see glossary and footnote 6 for explanation)
SHI
Social health insurance
SPC
Secretariat of the Pacific Community
STEPS
Not an acronym. It is the term used by WHO for the stepwise approach to
surveillance of risk factors.
STI
Sexually transmitted infection
VCH
Vila Central Hospital, Port Vila
WHO
World Health Organization
CURRENCIES
All dollars ($) are US dollars unless otherwise specified
One Vatu (VT) = $0.0109 in January 2013
$1.00 = VT 91.31 in January 2013
ix
GLOSSARY
Allocative and
A simple explanation of the difference between these two concepts is that technical
technical
efficiency is doing things right; allocative efficiency is doing the right things. That is,
efficiency
technical efficiency seeks to get the maximum possible given output - number of hip
replacements for example - for a given mix of doctors, nurses, and equipment. Allocative
efficiency, on the other hand, seeks to drive a higher level of health outcomes by
reallocating scarce resources to where they are likely to have the biggest (or most equitable)
impact. (See footnote 31 for references.)
Fiscal space
Fiscal space is defined as "the capacity of government to provide additional budgetary
resources for a desired purpose without any prejudice to the sustainability of its financial
position." Fiscal space also describes a situation "when a government has budgetary room to
increase spending and can do so without impairing fiscal solvency; that is, the government's
present and future ability to cover its recurrent expenditures and service its debt." (See
footnote 3 for references.)
Ni-Vanuatu
Citizens, especially of Melanesian origin, born in Vanuatu.
Nominal
The value in current year prices. Nominal prices do not take into account the effects of
inflation (see also "real").
Public goods
"Things that can be consumed by everybody in a society, or nobody at all
Examples
include clean air, a national defence system, and the judiciary. The combination of
nonrivalry and nonexcludability means that it can be hard to get people to pay to consume
them, so they might not be provided at all if left to market forces. Public goods are regarded
as an example of market failure and in most countries they are provided at least in part by
government and paid for through compulsory taxation" (The Economist, 2013).
Public health
Public health expenditure consists of recurrent and capital spending from government
expenditure
(central and local) budgets, external borrowings and grants (including donations from
international agencies and nongovernmental organizations), and social (or compulsory)
health insurance funds. (http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.XPD.PUB.)
Purchasing
Purchasing power parity (PPP) approaches seek to avoid distortions caused by market
power parity
fluctuations in exchange rates. PPP approaches recognize that actual costs may well be
lower in one country compared to another, so that the actual "purchasing power" of local
currency may be higher than might otherwise seem to be the case. PPP uses a notional
"international dollar" (I$) to distinguish it from US$.
Real
Adjusted for inflation (see also nominal).
expenditure
Total health
Total health expenditure is the sum of public and private health expenditure. It covers the
expenditure
provision of health services (preventive and curative), family planning and nutrition
activities, and emergency aid designated for health, but does not include provision of water
and sanitation. (http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.XPD.PUB.)
xi
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Vanuatu faces important public sector health challenges that can undermine social
and economic growth and development gains made to date. Those health challenges
come from increased demands on maternal and child health services from a rapidly
growing population; an unfinished agenda of controlling communicable diseases and
undernutrition; and a rapid rise in NonCommunicable Diseases (NCDs), such as diabetes
and heart disease. This "double burden" is clear when nearly 25 percent of all deaths in
Vanuatu arise from communicable, maternal, neonatal, and nutritional conditions, and
approximately 70 percent from NCDs. The demographic trends in Vanuatu exacerbate
these challenges. Increasing numbers of young women entering reproductive years
intensifies the need for maternal, newborn, and child health services. At the same time,
growing numbers of people are living longer or reaching old age; this change, combined
with the high prevalence of risk factors, is seeing a surge of NCDs and related
disabilities, as well as an increase in premature deaths. Chapter 2 of this report provides
further details.
Vanuatu also faces important health-financing challenges. This is having an
increasing impact on government, which funds the vast majority of health care. Several
challenges are becoming increasingly clear. On the one hand, per capita public
expenditure from government's own appropriated budget resources is low in absolute and
relative terms at VT 6,122 or $66.72 per person per year in 2012. The share of
government appropriations to health has also been falling, from over 12.0 percent in 2004
to 9.8 percent in 2013. Government appropriations to health per capita in real terms
(adjusted for inflation) have been flat over recent years and are now falling. On the other
hand, Ministry of Health (MoH) overall budgets have been increasing in nominal terms
in most years, adding to the strain on the overall fiscal management of the country's
budget. Public financial management is a challenge, with MoH expenditure exceeding
original appropriations in all but one of the last six years, requiring emergency
supplementary appropriations or support from external development partners. (The over-
expenditure in 2011 was the equivalent of government spending that year on two district
hospitals). The money that is spent is not well aligned to the government's own stated
priorities: hospitals still absorb nearly half of total government appropriations - double
the share going to community health centers - and the gap is widening.
Vanuatu does not have easy options for increasing government expenditure on
health. A business-as-usual approach will not address growing health needs, or be
financially sustainable. Options for improving health outcomes and health financing need
to be identified. However, the options are limited. Economic growth has been volatile,
ranging from -4.4 percent growth in GDP per annum to 7.36 percent since 2000,
reflecting the vulnerability of the Vanuatu economy to external economic and natural
disaster shocks. Given the relatively high rate of population growth, per capita income
has been similarly volatile, falling by -6.8 percent but never rising above 5.0 percent per
annum since 2000. And growth in real (adjusted for inflation) per capita income since
2000 has been very modest, rising a total of just 1.89 percent. Tax and other revenue
collections are low in absolute and relative terms, reflecting the volatile and generally
xii
subdued levels of economic growth; the small size of the formal sector in Vanuatu; and
the absence of income tax in the country. Government is currently running a fiscal deficit.
The overall macroeconomic environment, national revenue, and budgetary situation,
therefore, do not offer large untapped sources of financing for health. While there are
genuine requirements for additional financing for health, especially to fund frontline
workers, the MOH is already ranked third for expenditure allocations appropriated by
government after the Ministry of Finance and Economic Management (MFEM) and the
Ministry of Education.
Development partners can be helpful, but the main effort must come from
government. Government already relies heavily on development partners to supplement
- and in some cases possibly substitute for - government's own expenditure on health.
Development partners were already providing over one-third (37 percent) of total public
expenditure in 2012, lifting government-appropriated expenditure on health from VT
6,122 ($66.72) per capita to total public expenditure of VT 9,672 ($105.42) per capita.
Continued support from development partners is justified and required, given the growing
health burden in Vanuatu; the modest economic growth in the country; and recognized
limitations in mobilizing additional domestic revenue in a small island economy with a
large informal sector. However, the business case for greater financial support from
development partners is weak at present, particularly as the information and evidence
base for making good policy choices is patchy or missing: two-thirds of health centers
were not able to submit their basic information returns in 2011. While additional
financing for health could be used to fill critical gaps - for example in funding for
frontline health workers - weak links between expenditure allocations and government's
own priorities, and other aspects of public financial management will also constrain the
willingness of development partners to increase their financial support. Improving the
evidence base and strengthening public financial management will itself involve costs
and some level of additional investment; improvement measures will need to be carefully
thought through to find pragmatic "fit-for-purpose" interventions, and to consider the
possibility of increasing investments in these areas through other efficiency gains. While
development partners are a potentially important part of the solution to health challenges
in Vanuatu, the key responses must come from government itself. Chapter 3 of this report
provides further details on health-financing challenges in Vanuatu.
It is against this background that this report identifies nine options that could, at
least in principle, help put Vanuatu's health financing onto a more effective,
efficient, equitable, affordable, and sustainable trajectory. The nine options are (1)
increasing efficiency in the way financial, human, and other resources are used in the
health sector; (2) increasing cost-recovery measures; (3) increasing the share of
government expenditure to health; (4) relying on broader economic growth; (5)
increasing government expenditure via higher general taxation; (6) increasing
government expenditure via deficit financing; (7) increasing specific taxes; (8)
mobilizing additional nongovernment resources via insurance (including social health
insurance, community, and private insurance); (9) increasing external and donor
financing. Chapter 4 provides a detailed exploration of each of these options.
xiii
The analysis shows that the most practicable, strategically important, and
immediate option is for Vanuatu to make better use of its present resources by
improving efficiency. This, in turn, would involve reallocating government and
development partners' resources to interventions that make the largest, most equitable,
and sustainable impact on high-burden health issues, especially among the rural and
urban poor. Improving efficiency is desirable in its own right because it helps Vanuatu
make better use of the resources it already has. But improving efficiency is also more
likely than any other option to help "crowd in" additional financing, by raising
confidence among government and its development partners that any additional financing
will be used well to achieve results in health service delivery and provide better value for
money. Several specific areas for improving the allocative and technical efficiency of
public expenditure are explored. These can be summarized as follows:
Invest in information for evidence-based decision making. In its Annual
Report for 2011, the MoH noted that only one-third of health facilities -
frontline in health service delivery - submitted a report in 2011. 1 The MoH has
since identified the need to improve health information as one of its top priorities,
and with the support of development partners is now working on this. Sustained
effort will be needed to enable the MoH to operate in an informed way in terms of
inputs, activities, and the results achieved for the majority of the population.
Without this, neither the government nor major development partners are able to
confidently state the outcomes achieved with the support provided.
Shift financial and management resources to frontline services to address the
high burden of disease among the rural and urban poor. Hospitals have an
important role to play in health services. However, they now absorb nearly half of
total appropriated expenditure, and twice the share going to community health
centers, including rural areas, where the majority of poorer people live. One
approach for the government and development partners to consider is capping
current hospital expenditure and redirecting any new incremental funding to
community health centers. The budget for pharmaceuticals and medical supplies
has remained flat for many years.
Invest in primary and secondary prevention. MoH would avert projected
expenditure of up to VT 45,000 ($500) per year in pharmaceutical costs alone for
every person that avoided becoming an insulin-dependent diabetes patient.
Investing in primary and secondary prevention is strategically important. Yet
combined spending on NCD prevention was only VT 1.6 million or 0.6 per cent
of total public health allocation in 2010.
Be strategic about human resources. Personnel costs now absorb more than
two-thirds (67 percent) of the total MOH budget, a higher proportion than at any
time in the last five years, and are a factor crowding out operational expenditure.
Salaries and allowances are also a major driver of cost overruns in the MoH
budget. Yet at the same time, there are distinct shortages in the numbers of
doctors, nurses, and midwives providing frontline health services, including in
1. As of May 2013, MoH has reported informally that 47 percent of its aid posts and 74 percent of its health
centers/dispensaries have now submitted a report for 2011.
xiv
some of the more populated outer islands. Only about half (51 percent) of the total
MoH existing workforce is delivering frontline health services. 2 There is only
one full-time officer responsible for the Integrated Management of Childhood
Illnesses. There have been multiple changes of the director general (and those
placed in an acting position) over recent years; this has highlighted the need for
stable, effective leadership within the MOH to address strategic challenges.
Invest in public financial management. Regular and large expenditure overruns
on salaries, allowances, drugs, and hospitals undermine the credibility of
planning, and deter other parts of the Vanuatu government and development
partners from providing much-needed additional funds to MoH.
Invest in maintenance of existing - and future - assets. Investment in
preventive and routine maintenance is not captured by the National Health
Accounts or the main annual budget statement for the MoH. What little is
budgeted for maintenance is not enough to keep expensive capital assets in good
repair. The line item budget for repairs and maintenance at the Vila Central
Hospital (VCH) was 2.0 percent of the total annual budget for VCH, or 0.7
percent of the total value of fixed assets. A more realistic and appropriate figure
would have the annual budget for repairs and maintenance kept at about 8.0
percent of the total annual budget for VCH.
Invest in trialing innovative service-delivery options, and carefully monitor
outcomes and possible impact. The urgency of public sector health challenges
and the severity of public financing constraints mean that MoH should trial a
range of innovative service-delivery options. Contracting with NGOs is one
possibility that has led to rapid and sustained increases in health outputs and
outcomes in some other low- and lower-middle-income countries. However, it is
recognized that there are limited options available in the small country context
and, perhaps reflecting this situation, there are unfortunately few trials and no
rigorous evaluations available for the Pacific. Investing in impact evaluation is
essential to gain insight into the public health effects and value-for-money aspects
of existing public expenditure.
There is an important role for development partners too. At one end of the spectrum,
large, broad-based, flexible financing agreements must be far more targeted and aligned
to specific government strategies, instead of loose financing pools that provide stopgap
emergency funding for a series of fragmented activities. At the other end of the
spectrum, large, disease-specific, vertical programs should be sequenced and phased
carefully to ensure they focus more on high-burden, high-risk populations, and do not
distort or detract from other public sector health priorities during their own
implementation. Development partners should also be cautious in financing hospital
buildings and refurbishments in capital cities, as this can exacerbate existing deep
2. It is not possible to make a direct comparison of this figure with other Pacific Island countries due to
absence of data using that methodology - a potentially interesting and important research topic in its own
right. However, it is clear that Vanuatu has a lower ratio of doctors per population (0.116/1,000) than other
comparable Pacific Island countries or the average for lower-middle-income countries globally
(0.777/1,000); see figure 3.2.
XV
inequities between rural and urban health access, and impose a long tail of expensive and
often unfunded recurrent costs on governments.
Reviewing taxation on tobacco and other products that undermine health is another
important priority that should be given early consideration. Raising the price of
tobacco is a "win-win" for health and public finances. Raising the price of tobacco
through increased excise taxes, and then maintaining that excise level over time against
inflation discourages the uptake of tobacco among the poor and the young in the first
place, thereby preventing addiction and consequent health risks. Raising the price of
tobacco also generates revenue for the government. Raising the price via taxation of other
products known to be associated with obesity, diabetes, or ill health, including sugar-
sweetened soft drinks, alcohol, or salt-rich foods should also be considered.
The World Bank takes this opportunity to thank the government of Vanuatu and
development partners for discussions and insights in preparing this report. The World
Bank stands ready to assist the government of Vanuatu in moving forward on the reform
agenda.
xvi
CHAPTER 1: CONTEXT AND PURPOSE OF THIS REPORT
Context
1.1
The government of Vanuatu, a lower-middle-income³ Pacific Island country,
already knows it faces five strategic challenges in the health sector. These have been
candidly discussed in the latest MoH Annual Report (Government of Vanuatu, 2012c), a key
extract is available in annex 1. In essence, the MoH, itself, identifies the following five strategic
challenges:
Weak health system (human resources, financial management, health information system,
leadership, and management)
Resource allocation
Double burden of disease
Geographical location of facilities and communities
Natural disasters
1.2
Each of these five challenges is interlinked. Together, they affect and are affected by
broader macroeconomic prospects. Health interacts with the broader economy in several ways.
Some interactions are positive: healthy populations can be more economically productive, and
set in train favorable demographic trends that lay a foundation for sustained economic growth.
And economic growth can in turn provide additional resources for investing in health and
protecting the poor from health-related financial distress. The health sector can provide
meaningful and productive work for health workers, including in rural areas where other
employment opportunities are limited. Expenditure by government can also finance public goods
not adequately supplied by the private sector (disease surveillance, vector control of
communicable diseases); reduce inequity (through progressive taxation that is then spent on pro-
poor health needs); and address other market failures. But some interactions between health and
the broader economy create problems. Money and resources spent by government and
households in response to ill health cannot then be spent on other - perhaps more productive -
alternatives. Both the raising and then the expenditure of money for health can introduce
distortions into an economy, and be inefficient or inequitable. For households, expenditure on
health can be a source of impoverishment and debt traps (although this is not a problem in
Vanuatu given the extent of "free" or highly subsidized government health services). For
governments, expenditure on health can become unsustainable and a source of structural fiscal
deficits, particularly in the face of growing, ageing populations with high burden of disease. As a
general observation, as countries around the world become richer, they tend to spend not just
more in absolute terms on health and education, they tend to spend a higher proportion of their
resources on those sectors, a phenomenon known as Wagner's Law (Tandon A, 2006). To the
extent this has occurred in Vanuatu over time, it underlines the importance of making sure any
increasing share of resources flowing to that sector are then used wisely. For the health sector
3. Economies are divided according to 2011 gross national income (GNI) per capita, calculated using the World
Bank Atlas Method. The groups are low income, $1,025 or less; lower-middle income, $1,026-$4,035; upper-
middle income, $4,036-$12,475; and high income, $12,476 or more ((World Bank, 2013a)
Page 1
itself, many of the causes of ill health are found outside the health sector (poverty, lifestyle
factors, education [particularly for girls], water, and sanitation,), but the financial costs of ill
health are then subsequently borne inside the health sector at clinics and hospitals.
1.3
The interactions between the health sector and the broader economy are
particularly important in Vanuatu, as they are in the rest of the South Pacific. This is so for
three reasons. First, government expenditure dominates health expenditure in the South Pacific,
more so than in other countries of comparable income levels. In Vanuatu, for example, 87
percent of total health expenditure from all sources came from public expenditure (government
and development partners) in 2011. This was a much higher proportion than in other lower-
middle-income countries, where only 52 percent of total health expenditure came from public
expenditure. It was even higher than the average 81 percent public health expenditure for Pacific
Island small states (World Bank, 2013b). Second, health expenditure is an important part of
government's total budget appropriations and payroll. MoH was allocated VT 1,609 million
($17.5 million) in 2013, which represented 9.8 percent of the total government allocation
appropriated from its own resources. MOH is the third-largest single ministry for allocations
from government's own appropriated resources, after the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Management and the Ministry of Education (Government of Vanuatu, 2012a).
1.4
The third reason the health sector interacts particularly with the broader economy in the
Pacific is that economic growth, and especially revenue collection by government, is not able to
keep pace with fast growing and, in some cases, ageing populations and their health needs. This
reflects the volatile nature of economic growth in the Pacific determined in part by the
vulnerability of that region to natural disasters and global economic downturns. But it also
reflects policy decisions by government. Vanuatu, for example, does not levy income tax.
Taxation and other revenue is lower in Vanuatu than in many other Pacific Island countries
(IMF, 2011).
1.5
In summary, the health sector has a particularly large impact on the overall level
and pattern of government expenditure in the Pacific and, therefore, on broader
macroeconomic variables and prospects for economic growth. This is true for Vanuatu as well,
where expenditure has exceeded initial appropriations in all but one year (2007) since 2006. This
has required supplementary budgets drawn from government-consolidated revenue and access to
donor funding: resources that could have been used for other developmental purposes. For some
countries in the Pacific, health expenditure is on a trajectory to become unaffordable,
unsustainable, and damaging to broader economic growth over the medium to longer term, given
growing and ageing populations, the increased prevalence of NCDs, and modest economic
growth.
Purpose of this report
1.6
Against that background, the World Bank has been asked to review current trends
in health expenditure in the context of the broader fiscal situation facing Vanuatu, and to
identify health-financing options that meet development goals in ways that are financially
affordable and sustainable. This process involved a series of missions to Vanuatu during 2012
Page 2
and 2013, and the review of budget and related documents with senior officials of MoH and
MFEM.
1.7
The World Bank recognizes that the MoH already has a wealth of documents and
analysis at its disposal as the evidence base for health-financing reform. Some of this
involves World Bank analysis of international experience in health financing from other
developing countries (Langenbrunner J & Somanathan A, 2011; Tandon & Cashin, 2010; World
Bank, 2005, 2009). International perspectives on health financing are also available from the
WHO, the IMF, and academic sources (Savedoff, 2007) (Heller P, 2005) (Clements B, Coady D,
& Gupta S, 2011). The World Bank further recognizes that the government of Vanuatu has
coauthored or received numerous analytical reports on the specific challenges of health
expenditure and financing in Vanuatu (Keane C, 2012; Pretorius & Certan, 2006; UNICEF,
2012a, 2012c; Whimp K, 2010). The World Bank is also aware that the government of Vanuatu
has produced many reports itself, which provide sufficient evidence for undertaking reforms in
health financing and improvements in resource allocation, including its own National Health
Accounts Report for 2007 (Government of Vanuatu, 2012d) and the Government of Vanuatu
Public Expenditure Review Health Sector 2011 (Government of Vanuatu, 2012e).
1.8
What this report therefore seeks to do is to link the urgent need for reform in the
health sector to broader economic and macroeconomic policy. It shows how the current and
projected health needs of the country, summarized in chapter 2, strain not just the MoH, but also
the broader macroeconomic environment and "fiscal space"⁴ of government. The report provides
an updated summary of the main health challenges and health-financing trends. It presents an
analysis of options for future health financing that would help government meet its development
objectives, but in a way that is financially affordable and sustainable. The goal of the report is to
help the government of Vanuatu make good public policy choices, both in terms of the health
sector itself and in broader public financing.
1.9
This report comes at an opportune time⁵ for policy makers in Vanuatu. It appears
almost half way through the government's wide-ranging Health Sector Strategy (2010-2016). It
comes after a national election in October 2012 and the installation of a government with a
refreshed mandate to pursue reforms, if it chooses. It comes at a time when there are new - and
disturbing - insights delivered through the WHO NCD STEPS survey and soon to be released
estimates of the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010 (Murray et al., 2012), about the health
burdens and risk factors for ill health in 187 countries globally, including Vanuatu. 6 WHO is also
currently working with the government on a Crisis Mitigating Package, which will have
4. "Fiscal space" is defined by Heller (2005) as "the capacity of government to provide additional budgetary
resources for a desired purpose without any prejudice to the sustainability of its financial position." Tandon and
Cashin (2010) further state that "fiscal space exists when a government has budgetary room to increase spending and
can do so without impairing fiscal solvency, that is, the government's present and future ability to cover its recurrent
expenditures and service its debt."
5
The initial draft of this paper was written in 2012.
6. The Global Burden of Disease Study 2010 provides estimates of 300 diseases (1980-2010 for deaths and causes
of death; 1990, 2005, and 2010 for disability-adjusted life years), 1,200 sequelae, and 67 risk factors. Individual
country estimates, including for all South Pacific countries with populations exceeding 50,000, are likely to be
released in the first half of 2013.
Page 3
implications for financing a nationwide response to the threat of NCDs. The Crisis Mitigation
Package is an important strategic approach for Vanuatu given the rise of NCDs, but has yet to be
fully costed. It is therefore unclear what additional financial - and management - demands
implementation of the package will place on MOH. The World Bank has recently released its
study on the Economic Costs of Non-Communicable Diseases in the South Pacific (Anderson,
2013) with Vanuatu as one of three country case studies, and is considering a program for
poverty mapping in Vanuatu that could incorporate some aspects of health. Government is likely
to continue to develop its initial medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF) for health in the
second half of 2013. Australia - which contributes approximately one-quarter of total public
expenditure on health - and Vanuatu are reviewing the strategic Australia-Vanuatu Partnership
Agreement during 2013.
1.10 There are limitations to note, particularly with respect to the timeliness and
accuracy of data. Mortality data - a basic starting point - is generally poor. For example, the
leading cause of death in Vanuatu, involving 199 cases, or over half (51 percent) of all recorded
deaths, is classified as "unknown"⁷ (Government of Vanuatu, 2012b). Less than half (48.6
percent) of health facilities provided the expected health information system (HIS) reports in
Vanuatu during 2010. Reporting coverage of this basic piece of information fell to just 34
percent in 2011. There is little data on mental health, a potentially large public health issue as
the population ages. Data on health financing is also patchy. The latest published National
Health Accounts relate to 2007, five years ago. Financial data is collected by function (salaries,
drugs) and level (hospital, health centers.), but there is little information on expenditure by
disease types (communicable versus noncommunicable) or how costs of service delivery vary
between levels of the health system. The recent Public Expenditure Review of the Health Sector
2011 asked if (public) money is being spent efficiently on health in Vanuatu and concluded "the
answer to this question is probably no. It is 'probably' no because the lack of data on the impact
of health services makes it tricky to give a definitive answer" (Government of Vanuatu, 2012e ).
Similarly, AusAID, which contributes almost one-quarter of total government expenditure on
health under a multiyear agreement, notes that "it is difficult to adequately assess progress
against the (higher-level) target results
because there is not enough reliable data coming out
of the health information system" (Australian Government, 2011). Importantly, there is little
available data on the equity implications of health financing; for instance, who contributes and
who benefits the most from scarce government resources.
7. This is then followed by 35 neonatal deaths, 30 heart-related deaths, 25 asthma deaths, 24 stroke-related deaths,
20 cancer deaths, 18 hypertension deaths, 18 diabetes deaths, 10 diarrhea deaths, and 9 pneumonia deaths.
Page 4
CHAPTER 2: HEALTH OUTCOMES AND CHALLENGES IN VANUATU
Context
2.1
Vanuatu is a lower-middle-income country in the southwest Pacific, comprising about 80
islands spread over vast distances. Basic data about Vanuatu are summarized in table 2.1 below.
Table 2.1 Summary Data on Vanuatu
Indicator
Economy and income
Gross national income (GNI) per capita 2011
US$2,870
GNI per capita 2011 (PPP) 8
I$ 4,500
Gross domestic product (GDP), 2011 (US$ current)
819.2 million
Demographics
Total population, 2011
245,619
Total fertility rate per woman, 2010ᵃ
3.5
Annual population growth rate per annum, 2010ᵃ
2.5 percent
Population age 0-14, percent of total, 2011
37 percent
Population age 15-64, percent of total, 2011
58 percent
Population age 65 and above, percent of total, 2011
3 percent
Population median ageᵃ
21 years
Population in urban setting (percent total population),
26 percent
2010ᵃ
Selected Health Indicatorsᵇ
Life expectancy at birth, 2010 (male/female)
69/72
Infant mortality rateᵃ
12/1,000 live births
Under-five mortality rateᵃ
14/1,000 live births
NCDs as percent of total deaths, all ages, 2008c
70 percent
Cardiovascular disease as percent of total deaths, all ages,
36 percent
2008ᶜ
Communicable, maternal, perinatal, and nutritional
24 percent
conditions as percent of total deaths, all ages, 2008c
Injuries as percent of total deaths, all ages, 2008ᶜ
5 percent
Selected Health Resources
Physicians per 1,000 population, 2010
0.11/1,000
Nurses and midwives per 1,000 population, 2010
1.7/1,000
Health expenditure
8. As noted in the glossary, purchasing power parity (PPP) approaches seek to avoid distortions caused by market
fluctuations in exchange rates. PPP approaches recognize that actual costs may well be lower in one country
compared to another, so that the actual "purchasing power" of local currency may be higher than might otherwise
seem to be the case. PPP uses a notional "international dollar" (I$) to distinguish it from US$.
9. This compares to the 2.3/1,000 health workers per total population that WHO estimates necessary, on average, to
achieve the health MDGs.
Page 5
Indicator
Total health expenditure as percent of GDP, 2011
4.11 percent
Private health expenditure as percent of GDP, 2011
0.5 percent
Public health expenditure as percent of total
87.8 percent
expenditure on health, 2011
General government expenditure on health (including
18.2 percent
external resources) as percent of total government
expenditure, 2010ᵃ
External resources for health as percent of total health
22.9 percent
expenditure, 2011
Government appropriations to health as percent of total
9.8 percent
government appropriations, 2013f
Per capita total health expenditure, current US$, 2011
US$133
Per capita total health expenditure, PPP constant 2005 in
I$ 190
2011
Per capita government expenditure on health at average
US$143
exchange rate, 2010ᵈ
Per capita government expenditure on health, PPP, 2010
I$ 217
Source: World Development Indicators 2012 (unless otherwise specified).
a. WHO 2012b; WHO Global Health Observatory 2013.
b. The maternal mortality rate is prone to estimation distortions given the small size of island
populations and is therefore not included.
c. WHO 2011c.
d. WHO NHA Database. Available at
http://apps.who.int/nha/database/StandardReport.aspx/ID=REP_WEB_MINLTEMPLATF WE
B_VERSION&COUNTRYKEY=84701.
e. WHO 2012d.
f. Government of Vanuatu 2012a.
Page I 6
Progress, including the health Millennium Development Goals
2.2
Vanuatu has achieved several important health outcomes in its short 32 years of
independence, including improved life expectancy. The MoH states that life expectancy at
birth for males is 67.4 years, and 70.4 years for females, based on 2003 estimates (Government
of Vanuatu, 2011a). WHO (2013) now estimates that life expectancy at birth is 69 years for
males and 72 years for females. The most recent - and interesting - estimates come from the
Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. This high-profile study estimated life expectancy at birth
for males in Vanuatu at 62.2 years in 2010 (with a 95 percent uncertainty interval range of 54.1
to 69.5 years) compared to life expectancy of 56 years at the time of Independence in 1980
(Wang H et al, 2012). Globally, a male life expectancy of 62.2 years is similar to that found in
the Federated States of Micronesia, Ghana, India, Lao PDR, Marshall Islands, Senegal, and
Seychelles. A Vanuatu male life expectancy of 62.2 years is higher than the average for Oceania
as a whole (58.8 years, although this average is brought down by just two countries: Papua New
Guinea (PNG) and Kiribati, where male life expectancy is 57.5 and 57.8 years, respectively) and
the Caribbean region (56.9 years). Vanuatu male life expectancy of 62.2 years is higher than in
the Solomon Islands (60.5 years) but lower than in Samoa (68.4 years), Tonga (67.3 years), or
Fiji (65.6 years). The Global Burden of Disease Study 2010 estimates paint a similar picture for
Vanuatu women: life expectancy is estimated at 66.9 years for females (59.8-72.5 years)
compared to 60.6 years in 1970. Again, this latest estimate of 66.9 years for women is higher
than for women in Oceania or the Caribbean as a whole; higher than for the Solomon Islands
(64.0 years) and PNG (60.3 years); but lower than for Tonga (73.8 years), Samoa (73.4 years),
and Fiji (68.8 years).
2.3
Vanuatu has made important progress on most of the health Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) 10 More specifically, Vanuatu is potentially on track to meet MDG
4 for reducing child mortality. The under-five mortality rate has fallen from 39/1,000 live births
in 1990 to 13/1,000 in 2011, a decline of 66 percent over that period. The infant mortality rate
has fallen from 31/1,000 to 11/1,000 between 1990 and 2011 (UNICEF, 2012b). There are
virtually no gender-based differences in the under-five or infant mortality rates. Vanuatu is also
potentially on track to meet MDG 5 of reducing maternal mortality. The maternal mortality rate
- a statistic prone to distortions in small populations - is estimated to have halved from
220/100,000 live births in 1990 to 110/100,000 in 2010. Progress has been made in reducing
communicable diseases (MDG 6): the annual parasite incidence for malaria has been decreasing
consistently from 198 per 1,000 in 1990 to 16 per 1,000 in 2009, and the rate of confirmed
malaria deaths has declined from 32 per 100,000 population to less than 1 per 100,000 over the
same period (Government of Vanuatu Prime Minister's Department, 2010). The tuberculosis
treatment success rate is estimated to be 96 percent (WHO, 2012a). Despite relatively high
levels of sexually transmitted infections, prevalence of HIV and AIDS is currently very low: nine
confirmed cases of HIV and two deaths since 2002.
10. The Millennium Development Declaration was adopted by the United Nations in September 2000. It involved
eight Millennium Development Goals including halving extreme poverty; reducing child deaths by two-thirds;
reducing maternal mortality by three-quarters; and halting and reversing the spread of major diseases between 1990
and 2015. Further details are available at http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/bkgd.shtml.
Page 7
2.4
Several factors outside the health system that contribute to health have also shown
progress: overall literacy rate for girls age 15 to 24 was estimated at 92 percent, similar to
boys 11 (Government of Vanuatu Prime Minister's Department, 2010), though some external
observers believe the functional literacy rate is actually lower. Additionally, 90 percent of the
population was using improved water sources in 2010 (WHO, 2012a).
Remaining challenges in communicable diseases, maternal, perinatal, and nutritional
conditions
2.5
Despite such progress, there is an unfinished agenda of reducing communicable
diseases, and death and disability from other basic causes. Almost one-quarter (24 percent) of
all deaths in Vanuatu in 2008 still resulted from basic communicable, maternal, perinatal, or
nutritional conditions. The epidemiological transition 12 has not been completed, at a time when
rapidly changing diets and increasing urbanization have increased the incidence of NCDs, such
as heart disease, stroke, and diabetes.
2.6
Undernutrition remains a strategic development challenge in Vanuatu. That is
because undernutrition increases the risk and severity of diseases, driving up health costs. It
reduces learning and workforce productivity. Maternal and infant undernutrition can set in train
irreversible damage to health. UNICEF recently found that undernutrition is geographically
widespread in Vanuatu, and the damaging effects occur during pregnancy and the first two years
of life. Recent studies found that 20 percent of children under five years are moderately stunted
(low height for age), 16 percent are moderately underweight (low weight for age), and 6.5
percent are moderately wasted (low weight for height). The high levels of moderate-to-severe
malnourishment among 12- to 59-month-olds across all regions and all economic quintiles imply
that this is a national public health challenge, although there are important regional variations
with noticeably high levels of stunting around Port Vila 13 (UNICEF and University of New
South Wales, 2012). Efforts to improve nutrition are not cost-effective if vulnerable groups,
such as children, are infected with intestinal worms. Recent government reports show that
coverage of deworming interventions to school children for intestinal worms infections
throughout six provinces dropped from 50,197 in 2008 to 23,651 in 2009. The government
considers it unlikely that it will meet MDG 1 of reducing hunger and undernutrition
(Government of Vanuatu, 2011a).
2.7
Immunization coverage has also been a challenge in Vanuatu, despite its cost-
effectiveness and general affordability, as a priority public health intervention. Government
acknowledges that there have been wide annual fluctuations in the routine immunization of
measles and also wide variations between provinces. Measles vaccine coverage - an indication
of the overall effectiveness of service delivery in a health system - was estimated at just 37.2
11. Although Vanuatu is unlikely to eliminate gender disparity in its schools by 2015, and indicators on female
empowerment more generally, including wage equality and positions of power and influence, remain poor.
12. In essence, a transition from communicable diseases as a major cause of death - characteristic of low- and
lower-middle-income countries - to NCDs and accidents/injuries as a major cause of death.
13. Torba and Sanma are the regions with the highest percentage of severely underweight children (4 percent in each
region); Port Vila and Sanma have the highest percentage of severely stunted children (9 and 10 percent,
respectively); and Port Vila and Penama have the highest percentage of severely wasted children (3 percent each)
followed by Sanma with 2 percent.
Page 8
percent for children ages 1 to 4 years for 2009. This increased to an estimated 86 percent in 2010
as the result of a special immunization campaign. Government believes the 2009 nationwide
catch-up campaign coverage was 97 percent (Government of Vanuatu, 2011a). Government
further recognizes that "there are genuine concerns that it is difficult for people in remote
communities to access health services, thereby compounding the difficulty of ensuring all infants
and
children are immunized Some of these communities would be very vulnerable to the
emergence of epidemic transmission of measles and possible outbreaks of other vaccine-
preventable diseases" (Government of Vanuatu Prime Minister's Department, 2010). Dengue
fever remains a problem.
2.8
Challenges remain in terms of maternal health. While an estimated 84 percent of
pregnant women have one antenatal visit, only about 60 percent appear to have the
recommended four visits, thereby missing the opportunity for proper screening and treatment for
malaria, hypertension, anemia, and diabetes (Government of Vanuatu Prime Minister's
Department, 2010). And while the national average of skilled birth attendance is relatively high
at about 80 percent, rates are lower in the more remote provinces. In Shefa province, where the
national referral hospital is located, an estimated 95 percent of births involve skilled birth
attendants, whereas in the more remote Torba province, the skilled birth attendance rate is
approximately 32 percent. Other aspects along the continuum of care for mothers and their
newborns is also often low, including access and use of modern family planning, exclusive breast
feeding of infants, immunization, and treatment of pneumonia. Recent UNICEF analysis found
that while the government provides basic (BEONC) and comprehensive (CEONC) emergency
obstetric and neonatal care at health centers and hospitals, the actual levels of coverage of these
interventions are as low as 50 and 25 percent, respectively. Only 25 to 50 percent of facilities had
all essential medicines and other commodities. Less than half (47 percent) of health centers and
dispensaries close to Port Vila had sufficient supply of antibiotics to treat pneumonia. There was
also low coverage of interventions delivered at the community level: interventions such as hand
washing with soap to prevent diarrhea and pneumonia are only practiced by 20 percent, and safe
disposal of child feces is reported only at 51 percent (UNICEF, 2012a).
2.9
Reproductive health more generally remains a challenge. The contraceptive
prevalence rate (CPR) among married women age 15 to 49 is estimated at 38 percent for the
decade 2000-10. There is pronounced variation according to education levels: CPR is 21 percent
for women with no education (Government of Vanuatu Prime Minister's Department, 2010).
Early marriage is a risk factor for the health of young women and their infants: 7 percent of girls
are married by age 15, and 13 percent are married between ages 15 and 19, particularly in poorer
and rural areas (UNICEF and University of New South Wales, 2012). Vanuatu is, therefore,
unlikely to meet MDG 5b of achieving universal access to reproductive health.
2.10 Other factors outside the health system also require attention. The percentage of
those using improved sanitation facilities in Vanuatu was 57 percent in 2010, higher than the rate
in Papua New Guinea but lower than in many other Pacific Island Countries (WHO, 2012a).
Page 9
Noncommunicable diseases
2.11 In the Pacific, NCDs are now the leading cause of death for which data are
available. As seen in annex 2, NCDs account for 70 percent or more of all deaths in nine out of
twelve Pacific countries. The most common cause of death in the Pacific is attributed to
cardiovascular disease, which accounts for between 29 and 38 percent of death from all causes:
more than from communicable diseases, maternal and perinatal conditions, and injuries
combined. NCDs, especially cardiovascular disease, cancers, and diabetes, accounted for about
70 percent of all deaths 14 in Vanuatu (WHO, 2011c). NCDs are also a major source of disability
and chronic illness. Diabetes is the leading cause of preventable blindness and kidney failure
globally, and the major reason for toe and leg amputations. Heart disease and stroke are major
contributors to long-term disability.
2.12 NCDs can impose large - but often preventable - financial costs on governments
in the Pacific. Recent studies (Anderson, 2013) found that the cost for diabetes-related kidney
dialysis in Samoa was expensive - approximately $38,600 per patient per year to the
government, or more than eleven times the GNI per capita of the country. Despite the high cost,
treatment was not particularly effective: two-thirds of patients had died within two years. But
even low-cost items can impose financial burdens on government health budgets when large
numbers of people use the items over many years. Glucose testing strips for diabetes patients
may cost only VT 42 ($0.45) per day, but used daily as normally required, these amount to $164
per patient per year, more than the total government expenditure on health per capita. The basic
testing strips alone would cost the government of Vanuatu $1,642 per patient over a ten-year
period in nominal terms (Anderson I et al., 2013) (The World Bank, 2012). Costs to government
also rise when NCDs such as diabetes, cancers, and heart disease progress to more advanced and
complex stages, requiring hospitalization, and training and salaries for specialists, and in some
cases overseas medical treatment (Anderson 2013).
2.13 Recent analysis (Anderson et al. 2013) shows that pharmaceutical costs to the
government of Vanuatu rise in large, stepwise patterns as diabetes or hypertension becomes more
severe. For diabetes, pharmaceutical costs to government increased more than four-fold from
US$5.59 per patient per year to US$24.55, as a person moved from regular testing of blood
glucose levels to first-stage oral medication. Pharmaceutical costs then jump nearly 15 fold to
US$367 per patient per year when insulin and other associated drugs are required. For
hypertension, pharmaceutical costs to government increased more than twelve times as the
patient advanced from first line drugs to additional drug therapy (US$1.38 per patient per year to
US$17.58), eventually rising to US$75 per patient per year if additional drugs are required.
These are conservative estimates relating just to pharmaceutical costs: the cost to government of
health worker salaries, equipment, hospital stays, and treatment of complications are not
included in the costing exercise.
2.14 Progression of diabetes and hypertension to more advanced stages squeezes an already
tight health budget. One patient in Vanuatu requiring insulin absorbs the equivalent drug
14. In total, WHO estimates that communicable disease, and maternal, perinatal, and nutritional conditions
accounted for 24 percent of all deaths in Vanuatu in 2008; NCDs accounted for 71 percent; and injuries accounted
for 5 percent.
Page 10
allocation of 76.4 other citizens. Only 1.31 percent of the total population could be treated with
insulin, or 5.3 percent treated with the full regime of anti-hypertensive drugs, before the total
government drug budget for the country was fully spent. Yet the latest estimates in Vanuatu
suggest a diabetes prevalence of 22 percent among those age 20 to 79 years.
2.15 Every person who adopted a healthy lifestyle and was able to avoid diabetes or keep it
under control would avert direct drug costs to the government of Vanuatu of up to US$367 per
person per year. Those able to avoid or control hypertension by adopting healthy lifestyles would
avert costs to government for drugs of up to US$75 per person per year, the equivalent of what
the government currently spends on average on 18 other citizens. (Anderson I et al., 2013)
2.16 NCDs also impose important economic and social costs in the Pacific. A noticeable
characteristic of NCDs in the Pacific - including Vanuatu - is that they are associated with
higher rates of premature death (that is, below age 60) than in other lower-middle-income
countries around the world. This is true for both males and females in Vanuatu, as seen in figures
2.1 and 2.2 below. Premature deaths rob the economy of potentially productive workers (and the
government of potential tax revenue). Premature deaths rob society of mothers and fathers and
valued community members.
Page 11
Figure 2.1 Premature Deaths of Males in the Pacific
Proportion of male premature NCD deaths, 2008
Kiribati
Nauru
Marshall Islands
Niue
Fiji
Cook Islands
Vanuatu
Solomon Islands
Micronesia FS
Tuvalu
Samoa
Lower Middle Income Average Globally (both sexes)
Tonga
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Proportion of premature NCD deaths
Source: (WHO, 2011b) .
Figure 2.2 Premature Deaths of Females in the Pacific
Proportion of female premature NCD deaths, 2008
Nauru
Marshall Islands
Kiribati
Vanuatu
Solomon Islands
Fiji
Tuvalu
Micronesia FS
Tonga
Cook Islands
Lower Middle Income Average Globally (both sexes)
Samoa
Niue
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Proportion of female premature NCD deaths
Source: (WHO, 2011b)
Page I 12
2.14 The widespread level of risk factors means Vanuatu is feeding a pipeline of future
NCDs, putting potentially unsustainable pressure on the health system. WHO conducted an
NCD STEPS survey in 2011 in representative parts of Vanuatu (WHO, 2012c). The results are
summarized in table 2.2 below. They show a widespread level of risk of acquiring NCDs. More
than one in five males and females of working age already have three or more risk factors for
acquiring an NCD. Only about 5 percent of women have no risk factors at all for acquiring an
NCD.
Table 2.2 Risk Factors for Acquiring NCDs in Vanuatu
(percent)
Selected Risk Factor
Both Sexes
Males
Females
Mean body mass index (kg/m2)
26.1
25.5
26.7
(25.9-26.4)
(25.2-25.8)
(26.4-27.0)
Percent who are overweight (BMI ≥ 25
50.9
45.5
55.9
kg/m2)
(48.8-53.1)
(42.8-48.3)
(53.2-58.5)
Percent who are obese (BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2)
18.8
13.9
23.3
(16.9-20.8)
(11.9-15.9)
(20.7-25.8)
Mean fasting blood glucose, including those
5.7
5.7
5.7
currently on medication for raised blood
(5.6-5.8)
(5.6-5.8)
(5.6-5.8)
glucose: mmol/L
Percentage with impaired fasting blood
18.8
19.0
18.6
glucose defined as follows: capillary whole
(17.1-20.5)
(16.6-21.5)
(16.6-20.7)
blood value ≥ 5.6 mmol/L (100 mg/dl) and <
6.1 mmol/L (110 mg/dl)
Percentage with impaired fasting blood
21.2
21.4
21.0
glucose, defined as capillary whole blood
(19.0-23.3)
(18.8-24.0)
(18.5-23.5)
value ≥ 6.1 mmol/L (110mg/dl) or currently
on medication for raised blood glucose
Summary of combined risk factors for
NCDs (current smokers; less than five
servings fruit and vegetables per day; low
level of physical activity; overweight (BMI ≥
25kg /m2); raised blood pressure (SBP ≥ 140
and/or DBP ≥ 90 mmHg or currently on
medication for raised blood pressure).
Percentage with none of the above risk factors
9.7
10.8
6.0
(7.5-11.9)
(8.2-13.3)
(3.6-8.5)
Percentage with three or more of the above
18.7
19.7
15.8
risk factors, age 25 to 44 years
(15.8-21.6)
(16.1-23.2)
(11.3-20.2)
Percentage with three or more of the above
30.6
28.0
42.6
risk factors, age 45 to 64 years.
(26.0-35.2)
(23.2-32.8)
(32.3-53.1)
Percentage with three or more of the above
22.3
22.3
22.1
risk factors, age 25 to 64 years
(19.3-25.2)
(18.9-25.7)
(17.2-27.1)
Source: (WHO, 2012c)
Page 13
Demographic drivers
2.15 Demographic factors will inevitably and increasingly impose additional challenges
for Vanuatu's health system and its financing, but from two quite different directions. On
the one hand, Vanuatu must anticipate a continued high level of need for antenatal, maternal, and
newborn care. The number of women delivering babies at the Vila Central Hospital (VCH) have
more than doubled in the last five years, 15 which the government attributes to improved skilled
birth attendance "and the increasing child bearing age of mothers" (Government of Vanuatu,
2012c). Currently about 7,000 babies are delivered each year (approximately 80 percent of
deliveries occur in a health facility). This is the inevitable consequence of a high total fertility
rate of about 4 births per woman, compared to other Pacific countries; 16 a birthrate of about 64
births per 1,000 women, age 15 to 19 years; and a low contraceptive prevalence rate
(Government of Vanuatu Prime Minister's Department, 2010). Unlike Polynesian countries such
as Samoa and Tonga, Vanuatu has little outward migration to relieve population pressures (and
earn remittances). This results in Vanuatu having the third-highest rate of total population
growth (nearly 3 percent per annum¹⁷) in the Pacific, after Solomon Islands and Guam, based on
Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) estimates (UNICEF, 2012c). The population is
projected to more than double from 245,000 in 2010 to 539,000 in 2050. Growth rates in Port
Vila have been about twice the average rate, placing particular stress on service delivery in the
capital (UNICEF and University of New South Wales, 2012).
2.16 An ageing population will also put pressure on the government's health system. The
demographic pyramid in figure 2.3 shows that Vanuatu currently has a young population. The
largest age cohort is 0 to 4 years. The median age is 20.6 years, one of the youngest in the
Pacific. However it is also true that there were noticeably larger cohorts beginning with the 45-
to-49 age group in 2009 (many of whom would have moved up into the next age group of 50 to
54 years by 2013). As each progressively larger middle-aged cohort moves up into older age
brackets, government must anticipate increasing incidence of age-related illnesses, including
chronic diseases such as diabetes, cancer, heart disease, and dementia. (It is worth noting that
this will still occur even if government is successful in reducing the currently high rates of
premature - before age 60 - deaths and morbidity. Nevertheless, delaying the incidence of
death and disability among otherwise healthy adults is easily justified on social and ethical
grounds. Postponing government expenditure to subsequent years is also rational.) In short,
government should anticipate increased demands on the publicly provided health system from
both the very young (due to high levels of birth deliveries) in the immediate and short term, and
increasingly over the medium term; and from the aged, as more and more people progress to
older age brackets.
15. From 2,170 in 2007 to 4,577 in 2011.
16. Vanuatu is ranked seventh out of twenty-one Pacific Island countries in terms of total fertility rate (TFR), putting
it in the top third.
17. Slightly above the latest estimate from WHO of 2.5 percent per annum.
Page 14
Figure 2.3 Population Pyramid in Vanuatu 1989 and 2009
1989 and 2009 (green line)
75+
70-74
65-69
60-64
Male
Female
55-59
50-54
45-49
40-44
35-39
30-34
25-29
20-24
15-19
10-14
5-9
0-4
10
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Source: Government of Vanuatu 2010.
Equity in health access and outcomes
2.17
Poverty rates at the overall national level are low: only 5.4 percent of people lived below
the $1.25 PPP¹ 18 per day poverty line in 2006. However national-level averages mask important
pockets of poverty, especially in rural areas: UNICEF estimated that in 2006 that 14.2 percent
of people under age 17 in Torba province lived below the $1.25 a day poverty line; and more
than 10 percent in Tafea and rural Shefa province. While more people, and more poor people
live in rural areas, there is a growing concentration of poverty and hardship in peri-urban and
squatter settlements around Port Vila. The government estimates that one-third of the population
of Port Vila had less than VT 11,075 per person per month, the basic needs poverty line for Port
Vila in 2006. This compares to an estimated 10.8 percent of people living below the basic needs
poverty line of VT 3,366 in rural areas (Government of Vanuatu Prime Minister's Department,
2010).
2.18 Inequity of access for basic health and education services for children is pronounced
in islands distant from the capital, Port Vila. A recent study (UNICEF, 2012c) by UNICEF
found that the most remote northern and southern provinces (Tafea, Torba, Samna) received only
40 to 50 percent of six essential health, nutrition, and education services. 19 This compared to
Malampa province where 50 to 60 percent of the women and children received basic services.
Shefa and Port Vila received 70 to 80 percent of the six essential services. Figure 2.4 below
maps the relative disparities by geographical location in Vanuatu. Only about 35 percent of the
vulnerable population of Vanuatu is covered by the current and quite innovative Village Health
18. See glossary and footnote 7 for a discussion about purchasing power parity (PPP).
19. The six measures were (1) primary school attendance rate, (2) percent not stunted, (3) DPT 3 immunization
coverage, (4) skilled attendance at delivery, (5) use of improved sanitation facility, and (6) birth registration.
Page 15
Worker program according to the latest UNICEF estimates (UNICEF 2012a). Most of the
population, especially the poor and vulnerable, is therefore not covered by face-to-face (the most
effective) preventive and promotion health activities (UNICEF, 2012a, 2012c).
Figure 2.4 Mapping of Disparities in Health and Education for Children in Vanuatu
Torba
Sanma
Penama
Malampa
Shefa
Tafea
Luganville
Port Vila
Vanuatu
Share of children
5.0
13.3
17.1
14.9
13.7
17.9
5.0
13.1
100.0
Poverty
Below $1.25/day
2.63
0.20
0.30
0.43
1.98
2.19
0.19
0.37
1.00
National BNPL
2.32
0.74
1.01
0.65
1.33
1.53
0.29
0.35
1.00
Regional BNPL
1.79
0.35
0.45
0.27
1.15
1.30
0.84
2.43
1.00
50% median
2.01
0.85
0.95
0.78
1.19
1.55
0.40
0.35
1.00
Deprivation
Shelter
2.97
0.76
2.66
0.24
0.04
2.11
0.23
0.06
1.00
Sanitation
1.53
3.07
0.00
0.00
0.17
2.63
1.03
0.17
1.00
Water
0.70
1.36
0.69
0.49
0.55
2.66
0.00
0.16
1.00
Information
1.60
1.24
1.44
1.30
0.67
1.37
0.25
0.12
1.00
Food
1.58
2.82
1.62
1.38
1.00
1.50
2.28
3.92
1.00
Education
1.04
0.28
0.68
0.07
0.37
1.28
0.31
0.43
1.00
Health
1.07
1.13
1.11
0.17
0.98
1.32
1.54
1.45
1.00
At least 1 severe deprivation
2.06
1.27
1.63
0.37
0.36
2.01
0.44
0.44
1.00
2+ severe deprivations
1.85
0.98
1.94
0.08
0.16
3.30
0.23
0.13
1.00
Food deprivation
Underweight
1.19
1.23
1.23
0.99
0.80
0.72
1.47
0.84
1.00
Severely underweight
1.82
1.64
1.64
1.27
0.27
0.77
0.73
1.45
1.00
Stunted
0.75
1.11
1.11
1.15
0.82
0.88
0.84
1.11
1.00
Severely stunted
0.47
1.31
1.31
0.96
0.75
1.01
1.07
1.53
1.00
Wasted
1.34
1.78
1.78
0.71
0.88
0.17
1.49
1.17
1.00
Other
Birth registration
1.23
1.06
1.06
1.25
0.88
2.04
0.58
0.70
1.00
Marriage by 15
0.14
0.96
0.96
0.73
1.40
1.14
0.36
0.93
1.00
Marriage by 18
0.34
0.97
0.97
0.87
1.31
1.34
0.55
0.85
1.00
School attendance
1.01
1.06
1.06
0.86
0.97
1.14
0.99
0.95
1.00
Legend: Red/High: More than 1.5 times the average. Blue/Average: Between 0.5 and 1.5 times the average. Green/Low: Less
than half the average. Scores for school attendance and birth registration are inverted from original scores to reflect that higher
rankings on these dimensions are better than lower rankings.
Source: UNICEF 2012c.
CHAPTER 3: HEALTH-FINANCING TRENDS
Health expenditure in Vanuatu compared to other countries
3.1
Vanuatu shares several health-financing characteristics with other comparable
countries of the South Pacific. Annex 2 provides details of latest available estimates from the
WHO Global Health Observatory for a range of health-financing statistics in Fiji, PNG, Samoa,
Solomon Islands, Tonga, and Vanuatu. It is apparent from that annex that Vanuatu exhibits many
of the health-financing characteristics of its comparable neighbors. These include the dominant
role of public expenditure in total health expenditure. General government expenditure on health,
which includes external financing from donors, accounts for 90.6 percent of total health
expenditure, second only to the Solomon Islands. External resources are also an important part of
health, financing almost one-quarter or 23.4 percent of total (that is, public and private) health
Page
16
expenditure in 2010. More recent figures from the Ministry of Health in Vanuatu confirm that
development partners provided over one-third (37 percent) of the total government expenditure
on health in 2012. More specifically, total government expenditure by the MOH was VT
2,424,723,687 ($26.9 million) in 2012. Of this, government financed VT 1,534,639,563 ($16.7
million), and development partners provided VT 890,084,124 ($9.7 million). The corollary of
government (with external support from development partners) providing a high share of total
health expenditure is that private expenditure on health and out-of-pocket expenditure on health
are low in Vanuatu.
3.2
Care must be taken in interpreting the statistics on per capita expenditure on health
between countries. This is partly because market exchange rates using US$ do not capture the
actual purchasing power of local currencies and local costs. Thus, WHO estimates that Vanuatu
has a total expenditure on health of US$157 per capita in 2010, third after Samoa and Tonga.
However, WHO also estimates that Vanuatu has an expenditure of 240 international dollars (I$)
per capita using purchasing power parity dollars 20 that take account of lower prices in Vanuatu,
making it second after Samoa. Care should also be taken in interpreting the table in annex 2 as
WHO estimates of general government expenditure include all sources of financing, including
official development assistance (ODA). Thus, Vanuatu is recorded as having a per capita
government expenditure of US$143 in 2010, or I$ 217. This is clearly higher than the VT 6,248
(US$69) per capita government expenditure when calculated using only those resources financed
by the government from its own internally generated resources (without recourse to official
development assistance). 21
Recent expenditure trends within Vanuatu
3.3
Figure 3.1 below displays trends in what the government appropriates and spends on
health from its own internal resources. It does not include aid funding from development
partners. It therefore provides insight into how, where, and how well government allocates its
own resources to meet its development objectives. Several features are apparent from this graph.
20. See glossary and footnote 7 for a discussion about PPP.
20. There are two important discrepancies in statistics about the role of external financing in Vanuatu, which will
need to be resolved during discussions with government of Vanuatu officials. The first discrepancy occurs between
government and WHO statistics. Government budget documents show that Vanuatu MoH expenditure was VT
1,750,451,526 in 2010. With an estimated population of about 245,619, this means per capita, government
expenditure (from its own appropriations) to MoH equal to VT 7,126 or about $77 per capita in 2010. But WHO
statistics show a per capita government expenditure on health of $143 in 2010. If the $143 figure is correct, this
would suggest external financing of $66 per capita, or 46 percent total expenditure. This seems high. The second
discrepancy concerns differences within government of Vanuatu's own statistics. As noted in paragraph 3.13 below,
MFEM budget documents show that external financing was VT 344 million (16.9 percent of total MoH expenditure)
in 2012. However MoH Summary Report to the Executive on September 30, 2012, states that development partners
budget for 2012 was VT 890 million, or 37 percent of total combined development partners' and Government of
Vanuatu budget.
Page
17
Figure 3.1 Ministry of Health Expenditure Trends Using Government-Appropriated
Resources
MoH expenditure from Government
appropriations
2,000,000,000
1,800,000,000
1,600,000,000
1,400,000,000
1,200,000,000
Vatu (current)
1,000,000,000
800,000,000
600,000,000
400,000,000
200,000,000
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
Original appropriation
Actual expenditure
Hospital Services
Of which VCH
Planning and Administration
Community Health Services
Purchase of drugs
Source: (Government of Vanuatu, 2012a).
3.4
First, appropriations and expenditure are both generally rising in nominal terms²²
over time, but in a rather volatile manner. The total appropriation was VT 997 million in
2006, rose to VT 1,736 million in 2010, and then declined to VT 1,596 million in 2011. (It
subsequently declined again to VT 1,534 million in 2012, and then rose to VT 1,609 million for
2013.) The peak in appropriations and expenditure in 2010 coincides with large one-off
payments for retirements (captured by the blue line in figure 3.1: "planning and administration").
Overall levels of government health expenditure also reflect a wide number of factors that may,
or may not, directly address basic health needs: the government's recent Public Expenditure
Review of the Health Sector 2011 noted, for example, that "if you remove the impact of health
worker salaries in 2006, then spending in this sector has not kept in line with population growth
or even the growth of the rest of the national budget. Therefore the trend is worrying"
(Government of Vanuatu, 2012e).
22. That is, just looking at the actual numbers from each year, not taking into account inflation. See paragraph 3.11
below to see trends in real terms (that is, adjusted for inflation).
Page 18
3.5
Second, actual expenditure exceeded the original appropriation in every year except
2007. The cumulative total of expenditure exceeding original appropriations is VT 292 million in
the six years between 2006 and 2011. The largest gap between the government's original
appropriation and actual expenditure was a gap of VT 92 million in 2011. To put this in
perspective, the over-expenditure in 2011 was the equivalent of government spending that year
on two district hospitals (those in Norsup and Lolowai). The over-expenditure was 22 percent
more than what the government spent on its community health centers in Malampa province, the
largest in the country. Expenditure on salaries and allowances, especially in the hospitals, is a
proximate cause of the over-expenditure, but weaknesses in budget control and financial
management are the root cause (Pretorius & Certan, 2006). By September 2012, the MoH had
already spent 97 percent of the drugs and consumables budget, leaving a shortfall of VT 27
million for the rest of the financial year that needed to be made up from other sources. Also by
September 2012, the annual payroll budget for Torba Hospital, Community Health Tafea, and
Director Northern Health Care had been fully expended. It was expected that the payroll budgets
for Vanuatu Central Hospital, Lenakel Hospital, Norsup Hospital, and Community Health at
Penama would be fully spent by November (Government of Vanuatu, 2012f).
3.6
Third, "planning and administration" has increased in absolute and relative terms.
Total expenditure on "planning and administration" increased from VT 112.8 million in 2006
(10.5 percent of actual health expenditure from government appropriations) to VT 296 million in
2011 (17.5 percent of actual expenditure). Part of this increase has been used to facilitate the
payment of a package of one-off retirements. Personnel costs across the whole of the MoH are a
significant proportion of total expenditure: VT 1,001 million in 2012, or 59 percent of
government's own appropriation of VT 1,682 million to the MoH from its own resources.
Another driver of wage increases has been the salaries and allowances charged at hospitals. A
recent study, albeit still in draft stage²³ (UNICEF, 2012a) noted:
A notable challenge for the government is the control of the public wage bill, which is
much larger than in other PICs [Pacific Island countries], even though the total share of
public employment is similar. The IMF noted that wages constitute about half of
recurrent government expenditures, and that the public wage bill increased from 10.5
percent of GDP in 2005 to 12.0 percent of GDP in 2008. By their nature, public health
and education spending involve significant wage shares.
At the same time, the share of government financing to community health centers has fallen from
21.6 percent of the government's health budget in 2006 to 18.1 percent in 2010 (Government of
Vanuatu, 2011c). Additional funding from development partners has helped to maintain some
service-level capacity in rural areas.
3.7
Despite an increasing wage bill, there remain important gaps in the actual numbers
of frontline health workers. Vanuatu has a lower ratio of doctors per 1,000 (0.116/1,000) than
other similar-sized²⁴ Pacific Island countries, or the global average for lower-middle-income
23. Permission was granted from the authors to cite this particular quotation from their draft report.
24. However it should be noted that, other things being equal, it would be easier for more compact island groupings
like Samoa and Tonga to have a higher ratio of doctors per 1,000 than it is for Vanuatu with its widely dispersed,
low-density population.
Page
19
countries (0.777/1,000) as shown in figure 3.2 below. A more recent and separate study
concluded that there was just 1 doctor per 47,250 people in rural areas, and 1 doctor per 1,492
people in urban areas. There was also only 1 nurse per 218 people in rural areas, and 1 nurse per
179 people in urban areas (Roberts & Lin S, 2012). There is only one full-time staff member
responsible for Integrated Management of Childhood Illness (IMCI), a strategically important
approach to reducing infant and childhood death and disability (Government of Vanuatu, 2012c).
Furthermore, the government has stated that dengue case surveillance - a prerequisite for
evidence-based planning and priority setting, and a classic "public good" that can best be done
by government - was being conducted until March 2011. According to government documents,
this then ceased due to "shortage of manpower and heavy workload from malaria elimination
activities" (Government of Vanuatu, 2012c), although it could be argued that the malaria
surveillance work could have spillover benefits in identifying dengue risks, given both are
mosquito-borne diseases. One recent assessment of the health workforce, completed with
support from UNICEF, identified gaps in frontline staff; see figure 3.3 below.
Figure 3.2 Doctors per 1,000 Population
Physicians per 1000 population in 2010 (or
other latest year available)
Lower Middle Income Average
0.777
Tonga
0.563
Samoa
0.479
Fiji
0.426
Solomon Islands
0.224
Vanuatu
0.116
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Physicians per 1000 population
Source: World Bank 2013b.
Page 20
Figure 3.3 Frontline Staff Shortages
% of staff gap by Cadre, Vanuatu
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
Percentage
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Nurse
General
Nurse Aids
Registered
Admin/Logistic
Laboratory
Pharmicist
Registered
Village Health
Parctioners
Practioners
Midwives
support staff
Techanician
Nurse
Workers
Source: UNICEF 2012a.
3.8
Fourth, expenditure on drugs has plateaued in nominal terms, and fallen in real and
absolute terms. Expenditure on drugs from government appropriations was VT 109 million in
2006. This increased by 12.8 percent over the five-year period to 2011, reaching VT 123 million
by 2011. This represented a decrease in real terms (adjusted for inflation). It is also a decrease in
relative share of government-appropriated expenditure, with expenditure on drugs falling from
12.8 percent of government-appropriated health expenditure in 2006 to 7.3 percent in 2011.
Development partners, including Japan and Australia, were called on to fund urgent additional
purchases of drugs outside the government's appropriation process. Japan was also a regular,
annual financial supporter of drug purchases.
3.9
Fifth, hospital services absorb nearly half (average 48 percent) of total expenditure,
and more than twice the expenditure on community health centers. The appropriation for
hospitals was VT 482 million in 2006 (actual expenditure was significantly more at VT 529
million) and 49 percent of the budget at the time. There is, of course, a balance to be struck here.
Hospitals provide essential - and often life-saving - services, including for emergency and
obstetric care. Hospitals are also essential components in treating more complex aspects of
NCDs, including diabetes-related kidney failure, cancers, and strokes. Hospitals can also perform
important broader, health-strengthening functions, such as serving as centers for supervision and
training, and can provide primary-level prevention and promotive services, especially through
outpatient departments. On the other hand, hospitals can also absorb expenditure at the expense
of lower-level health services, which could provide primary and secondary preventive services at
lower unit costs. In Vanuatu, the appropriation for hospitals had risen by over 50 percent in
nominal terms to VT 732 million in 2012 (48 percent of total appropriations). In every year
since 2006, the actual expenditure on hospitals has been at least double that of expenditure on
community health centers. Indeed, in every year, government expenditure at the Vila Central
Hospital alone has been greater than the total combined expenditure on community health
centers, and the gap has been widening. This is shown in figure 3.4 below.
Page 21
Figure 3.4 Expenditure on Hospitals versus Community Health Centers
Expenditure on hospitals VS community
health centres
900,000,000
800,000,000
700,000,000
600,000,000
Vatu (current)
500,000,000
400,000,000
300,000,000
200,000,000
100,000,000
-
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
Total Hospital Services
Of which Vanuatu Central Hospital
Community Health Centres
Source: Government of Vanuatu 2012.
3.10 It should be noted that MoH has received modest - and recently declining -
allocations when inflation is taken into account. Figure 3.5 below shows trends in final
expenditure from government's own appropriations, including supplementary appropriations in
both nominal and real (adjusted for inflation) terms.
Figure 3.5 Final Expenditure from Government's Own Appropriations
MOH final expenditure from government's
own appropriations
2,000
1,500
Million Vatu
1,000
(nominal and real)
500
-
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
MoH Appropriation current Vt
MoH appropriation Real (2006)
Source: Government of Vanuatu 2012.
Page 22
3.11
More importantly, the per capita real budget allocation to MoH has plateaued since
2007, and is dropping in 2012. In other words, and despite an increase in the total population,
the resources provided by government over time, and in the face of inflation, have not increased
per person. Indeed, they have now started to fall. This is shown in figure 3.6 below.
Figure 3.6 Per capita MoH Budget Trend in Real Terms
Per Capita MoH Budget Trend in real terms
8,000
7,000
6,000
5,000
Vatu (real 2007)
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Source: Government of Vanuatu 2012.
3.12 Furthermore, the share of total government appropriations to MoH has been quite
volatile, but on a generally downward trend. As seen in figure 3.7 below, nearly ten years ago
MoH received over 12 percent of the government's appropriations. This has not been matched in
any year since then. Indeed, the allocation of VT 1,534 million in 2012 represented 10.4 percent
of total government appropriations, the lowest level in almost ten years. The situation
deteriorated further in 2013: MOH was allocated VT 1,609 million ($17.5 million), which
represented 9.8 percent of total government appropriations for that year.
Figure 3.7 Share of Government Budget to MoH
Share of Govt budget going to MoH
12.5%
12.0%
11.5%
11.0%
10.5%
10.0%
9.5%
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Source: Government of Vanuatu 2012.
Page 23
3.13 Financial support from development partners is also a key characteristic of health
financing in Vanuatu. Figure 3.8 below shows total government expenditure on health; that is,
the combination of those resources spent by MoH through the government's own appropriations
and domestic budget process, together with expenditure by development partners. It is apparent
that the level and relative share of development partner financing have risen over recent years.
More specifically, government of Vanuatu statistics² show that development partner
expenditure increased from VT 31.3 million (3.2 percent total government expenditure on health)
in 2004 to VT 419.8 million (21.18 percent) in 2012. It can also be seen that government
expenditure from its own appropriated resources peaked at VT 1,750 million in 2010 (a year of
significant retirement and redundancy payments). After 2010, the rise in total government
expenditure essentially tracks that of expenditure by development partners. It could just as well
be argued that donor funding has therefore substituted for government's own expenditure efforts,
allowing government to spend resources on other sectors (for example girls' education, road and
energy infrastructure) that may or may not yield higher and more equitable socioeconomic
growth in Vanuatu. Figure 3.9 below shows the rise of development partner financing.
25. It is difficult to find consistent data on development partner expenditure on health. Official government statistics
state that the government appropriated VT 1,534,639,563 from its own resources to the Ministry of Health in 2012
(with actual expenses then being VT 1,562,160,907). Those same official statistics show that development partners
then provided VT 419,824,089 to the MOH in 2012 or 21.18 percent total government expenditure on health.
However some separate MOH official data sets state that total development partner financing was VT 890,084,124
in 2012, bringing the total government expenditure (appropriated and development partners) to VT 2,424,723,697.
This latter data set suggests development partners therefore contributed 37.00 percent of total government
expenditure, rather than 21.18 percent. The World Bank is continuing to work with government to resolve these
inconsistencies. In the meantime, the official government data set is used in figure 3.8 as that also provides an
internally consistent data set and trend over time.
Page 24
Figure 3.8 Total Government Expenditure on Health
Total Government expenditure on health
Source: Government of Vanuatu
2,500,000,000
2,000,000,000
Vatu (current)
1,500,000,000
1,000,000,000
500,000,000
-
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Total Government expenditure on health
Government appropriated recurrent expenditure
Development Partner component
Source: Government of Vanuatu 2012.
Figure 3.9 Support by Development Partners
Development partner expenditure on
health
500,000,000
400,000,000
300,000,000
Vatu (current)
200,000,000
100,000,000
-
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
Development partner expenditure on health
Source: Government of Vanuatu 2012
3.14 Australian Government development assistance (AusAID), SPC/Global Fund to Fight
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (GFATM), and UNICEF are the main development
partners in 2012. Figure 3.10 below shows the total recurrent budget for the MoH in 2012, with
Page I 25
the main development partners' share highlighted. It can be seen that development partners
provide over one-third (37 percent) of the total recurrent budget
Figure 3.10 Government and Development Partners Share of Recurrent Expenditure 2012
Total Government recurrent expenditure
allocation for 2012
Government recurrent budget
AusAID Development Financing
Agreement DFA
SPC / GFATM malaria
UNICEF
AusAID other
WHO
UNFPA
SPC / GFATM HIV and AIDS
Source: Government of Vanuatu 2012f.
3.15 The allocations within the development partners' budget currently reveal a mixed
picture: very generalized support across a range of health activities; vertical and disease-
specific funding; and some large, lumpy one-off financing for hospital infrastructure.
Figure 3.11 shows that AusAID Direct Funding Agreement (DFA) of VT 369 million accounts
for the largest share (41 percent) of development partners' recurrent financing. The DFA
provides financial support across a very wide range of activities to the MoH. It is also noticeable
from figure 3.11 that specific diseases also attract large financing shares from development
partners. Malaria attracted VT 222 million in 2012, or one-quarter of all development partner
financing in 2012, funded through SPC/GFATM and AusAID. HIV and AIDS attracted VT 28.7
million in 2012 (VT 16.8 million from SPC/GFATM, and VT 11.8 million from the Pacific
Islands HIV and STI Response Fund). This was 75 percent more than the VT 16 million
provided directly to NCDs, despite the fact that NCDs account for over 70 percent of all deaths
in Vanuatu, compared to a total of nine confirmed cases and two deaths from HIV and AIDS
since 2002 (Government of Vanuatu, 2012f). Some forward estimates within government project
an injection of capital expenditure of about VT 1.14 billion in 2013, and a further VT 481
million in 2014, for reconstruction of part of the Vila Central Hospital from Japan.
Page 26
Figure 3.11 Breakdown of Development Partner's Budget in 2012
Development partners' budget 2012
AusAID Development Financing
Agreement DFA
SPC / GFATM malaria
UNICEF
AusAID other
WHO
UNFPA
SPC / GFATM HIV and AIDS
SPC NCD
SPC HIV Response Fund
Source: Government of Vanuatu 2012f.
Projected future resourcing and expenditure trends
3.16 The future level and pattern of funding and expenditure is problematic. Much will
depend upon the level of economic growth in Vanuatu (see next chapter); the extent to which
economic growth then generates revenue for the government; the share of government
expenditure going to health; and the way scarce funds - both government and development
partners - are used. Government has started the process of planning expenditure through some
early work on a draft health sector medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF). The MTEF
will cover the remaining years of the current Health Sector Strategy 2010-2016. The Ministry of
Finance and Economic Management stated that, in preparing the MTEF, all line departments
should assume that government of Vanuatu revenue allocated to line ministries will increase by
the estimated inflation rate (2.8 percent) over the period 2013-16. Based on this information the
government's estimated resource envelope for health will increase slightly from VT 1.575 billion
in 2013 to VT 1.665 billion in 2016. In developing the MTEF for the MoH, it is assumed that the
allocation to health will be at about 11 percent of total government revenue. Any MTEF that is
developed provides an opportunity for government - and its development partners - to better
align scarce resources with the existing and future health challenges of Vanuatu, and to situate
MoH expenditure on health within the broader fiscal and macroeconomic environment facing
Vanuatu now and in the coming years.
Page 27
CHAPTER 4: OPTIONS FOR HEALTH FINANCING
RECAP OF THE CHALLENGE
4.1
Chapter 2 of this report shows that Vanuatu is facing an increasingly important and
complex series of health challenges. The movement of increasingly large numbers of young
women into reproductive age cohorts expands demand for maternal, newborn, and child health
services. Rates of undernutrition, including stunting, are surprisingly high and coexist with
increasing levels of overweight and obesity - risk factors for complex health problems such as
diabetes and cardiovascular disease. Vanuatu has a higher level of premature deaths than other
lower-middle-income countries, potentially undermining social and economic development more
broadly. Demographic factors will put further, but differing, pressure on the health system; for
instance, the expansion of services for women and newborns due to population growth, as well
as rising and more complex treatment of NCDs (and potentially dementia and mental health) as
the population ages.
4.2
Chapter 3 of this report shows that the level and pattern of health financing is not
well suited to meeting current, let alone future, demands. Government appropriations per
capita on health are low in absolute terms (VT 6,122, or $66.72 per person in 2012²⁶).
Government expenditure on health per capita has not increased in real (adjusted for inflation)
terms over the last five years. The share of government expenditure to health has been decreasing
and is now below 10 percent of total government expenditure. Donor financing appears to
substitute for government financial effort, and some of it is either "vertical" and disease-specific
- capital intensive in the form of hospital infrastructure - or only loosely connected to
government's strategic priorities. The money that is spent is not well aligned to the government's
own stated priorities. The Public Expenditure Review of the Health Sector stated that "the
linkages between the sector strategy and resource allocation across the sector is weak." As just
one example, that Review noted that "noncommunicable diseases are recognized as a growing
concern in Vanuatu but combined spending on prevention was only VT 1.6 million or 0.6
percent of total public health allocation" (Government of Vanuatu, 2011c, 2012e).
4.3
These two challenges are each trending in the wrong direction. On the one hand,
Vanuatu has a rapidly growing population with increasing health needs. On the other hand, it has
flat, or declining, capacity to finance public health from its own resources.
RESPONDING TO THE CHALLENGES
4.4
Against that background, this section now assesses nine broad health-financing
options for Vanuatu. The nine options are (1) relying on broader economic growth; (2)
increasing government expenditure via higher general taxation; (3) increasing government
expenditure via deficit financing; (4) increasing the share of government expenditure to health;
(5) increasing external and donor financing; (6) increasing specific taxes; (7) mobilizing
additional nongovernment resources via insurance (including social health insurance, community
26. Government's appropriation was VT 1,534,639,563 in 2012. Assuming a population of 250,676 translates to VT
6,122 per person per year, or $66.72.
Page 28
and private insurance); (8) increasing cost-recovery measures; and (9) increasing efficiency.
These nine options build on well-established and systematic ways of assessing health financing,
especially in developing countries (Gottret P & Schieber G, 2006; Hsiao W, 2007; Roberts M,
Hsiao W, Berman P, & Reich M, 2008; Tandon & Cashin, 2010; WHO, 2010b; World Bank,
2009). Of course, in principle, there is a tenth option: Do nothing and simply continue as in the
past on a "business-as-usual" approach. This is not a realistic option, given government's own
commitment to change and reform (see annex 1); the growing health needs of the country
(chapter 2 of this report); and the unsustainable nature of health financing in Vanuatu (chapter 3).
Option 1: Rely on broad economic growth
4.5
Ultimately, the pace and nature of economic growth per capita will determine the
level of resources available for potential use by households or government for health care.
However as figure 4.1 shows, overall economic growth in Vanuatu has been volatile, ranging
from a low of -4.4 percent in 2002 to a high of 7.36 percent in 2006. Senior government officials
note that the economic growth rate slowed in recent years when stimulus from US aid for road
infrastructure finished; the global financial crisis emerged; and competition for tourist dollars
elsewhere intensified - three factors emphasizing the vulnerability of Vanuatu's economy to
external factors (Tevi O, 2012). Furthermore, population growth has meant that per capita
economic growth has, since 2000, been consistently lower than in other lower-middle-income
countries in nominal terms (figure 4.2) as well as being quite volatile, falling as low as -6.8
percent in 2002, but never exceeding a +5 percent. And the trends in real (adjusted for inflation)
GDP per capita have, like in other smaller Pacific Island countries, been significantly lower than
in other lower-middle-income countries globally (figure 4.3). Indeed, real GDP per capita in
Vanuatu has increased only slightly from international dollars²⁷ 3,794 in 2000 to 3,866
international dollars in 2011, an increase of just 1.89 percent in 11 years. Due to population
growth, the growth in real GDP per capita has been consistently lower than the real growth of
the economy as a whole (figure 4.4).
27. International dollars are a notional figure that take into account the purchasing power of local currencies and
avoid the "noise" caused by exchange rate fluctuations when using US$ market rates. See also the glossary.
Page 29
Figure 4.1 Growth in Nominal GDP
Growth in nominal GDP
10.00
8.00
6.00
4.00
Per cent change on
2.00
previous year
0.00
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
-2.00
-4.00
-6.00
Vanuatu
Pacific Island Small States
Lower Middle Income Countries
Source: World Bank 2013b.
Figure 4.2 Nominal GDP Per Capita Growth
(Percent Annual Change)
Nominal GDP per capita growth
8
6
4
2
Per cent change
0
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
-2
-4
-6
-8
Vanuatu
Pacific Island Small States
Low and Middle Income Countries
Source: World Bank 2013b.
Note: Pacific Island small states include Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia,
Palau, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu.
Page I 30
Figure 4.3 Real GDP Per Capita
Real GDP per capita (2005)
6,000
5,000
4,000
International
3,000
dollars (PPP)
2,000
1,000
-
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Vanuatu
Pacific Island Small States
Lower Middle Income Countries
Source: World Bank 2013b.
Page | 31
Figure 4.4 Growth Rates in GDP, and GDP Per Capita
Growth rates in GDP, and GDP per capita
(real 2006)
10
8
6
4
2
Per cent change
0
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
-2
-4
-6
-8
GDP
GDP per capita
Source: Government of Vanuatu 2013b.
4.6
The conclusion is clear: While economic growth is critical to Vanuatu, the volatility
and generally low rates of economic growth per capita mean it cannot be relied upon as a
stable source of additional revenue for health financing. As the latest IMF Article IV report
notes, "As a small open economy, Vanuatu is facing the dual challenge of large fluctuations on
the external side and a limited production base on the domestic side" (IMF, 2011). But even if
Vanuatu had a high and sustained rate of economic growth per capita, it would take many years
to generate additional resources for the economy, assuming that tax collection was effective and
efficient. Even then, sustained additional economic resources only permit increased expenditure:
this says nothing about the technical, human, and organizational requirements of delivering
health care. Economic growth per capita is therefore a necessary but by no means sufficient
option for putting Vanuatu on a path to sustainable health financing.
Option 2: Increasing general taxation
4.7
Increasing the general level of taxation, including through income taxes, and then
applying some or all of that planned-for increase in revenue to the health sector has some
advantages in Vanuatu. Domestic revenue in Vanuatu grew by an annual rate of 3.9 percent
compared to inflation of 3.2 percent between 2007 and 2011, so there was almost no real
increase, and revenue per capita declined. Vanuatu is unique among the Pacific Island countries
in that it does not levy income taxes, relying instead on a value-added tax and sales tax to raise
government revenue. As a result, the IMF notes that total revenue is low (18 percent of GDP)
compared to other Pacific Island countries (figure 4.5). Furthermore, the IMF forecasts that
reductions in import tariffs due to trade liberalization may lead to "possibly declining revenue,
[which] may not be able to support large expenditure needs in the future" (IMF, 2011).
Page 32
Figure 4.5 Tax Revenue and Composition as Percent of GDP in Selected Countries of the
Pacific
Tax Revenue
(In percent of GDP, 2008)
30
Others
Import duties
Domestic goods and services tax
Income tax
25
20
15
10
5
0
Fiji
Kiribati
Samoa 1/
Solomon
Tonga
Vanuatu
Source: IMF, APD LISC database.
Islands
1/ 2006 data for Samoa.
Source: IMF 2011.
4.8
Raising the taxation level, and imposing income tax, is technically and administratively a
relatively simple option compared to other options such as social health insurance (although this
may well be politically difficult). To the extent that taxation is raised from income taxes, it is
progressive, drawing more from wealthier people in Vanuatu than from poorer ones (although
excise taxes and VAT are regressive, taking proportionately more from lower-income groups).
Development partners are likely to welcome government effort to raise its own resources, and
may even be more inclined to support such efforts with their own financing.
4.9
However there are also counterarguments. The formal sector is small in Vanuatu.
Government's own official statistics state that there were only about 800 business licenses
registered to pay value-added tax in Vanuatu in 2006 - one definition used by government for
the "formal" sector. Nearly three-quarters (73 percent) of households in rural areas had no
member working for pay or profit in 2006 (Government of Vanuatu, 2006). More recently, the
Vanuatu National Provident Fund (VNPF) website states they only had 23,584 active
contributing members as at December 31, 2010 (latest date available) and only 3,092 actively
contributing employee companies. 28 The small size of the formal sector means the scope for
raising large amounts of revenue through income tax is limited (although having no income tax,
and relying on development partners to fund a substantial part of the health and other budgets is
a separate issue). Raising taxes can introduce distortions to the economy, 29 or raise inflationary
pressures if firms have the capacity to pass increased taxes on. Government therefore needs to be
28. The government of Vanuatu budget document for 2012 confirms that membership of the Vanuatu National
Provident Fund can be taken as a proxy for the level of formal employment in Vanuatu.
29. Generally known as "deadweight losses": as the tax drives a wedge between the prices consumers would have
otherwise been prepared to pay, and suppliers would have otherwise received, in the absence of the tax.
Page 33
sure that any increased expenditure it makes from additional taxes is effective, efficient, and well
targeted to overcome these disadvantages. If general taxes were to be raised to pay for health, the
sequencing of events should also be considered to make the tax increases more politically
acceptable. For example, government might need to borrow or rely on external financing to first
refurbish and rehabilitate existing health facilities so that the public see tangible benefits
occurring in the health sector before the tax impost occurs. Introducing income taxes also
requires administrative resources, and is more likely to be practically and politically achievable
as the formal sector grows.
4.10 In principle, government can also expand its overall fiscal space by increasing the
efficiency of its revenue collection, including through reductions in tax evasion. (There is
anecdotal evidence that duty-free tobacco for purchase by overseas tourists is also accessible to
local residents.) The leading item of tax revenue continues to be VAT, which contributed VT
5,009.8 million at the end of 2012, close to the budget forecast and 6 percent higher than what
was collected during the same period in 2011. Government believes the main reasons for the
increased VAT collection are economic conditions and improved VAT compliance during the
year (Government of Vanuatu, 2012a). Nevertheless, there are international examples of how
countries have further improved collection of VAT. Brazil, for example, has issued tax credits to
consumers who then present receipts of VAT paid, transforming consumers into active
participants in tax collection.
Option 3: Increase the budget for health through broader macroeconomic-level deficit
financing
4.11 In theory, government could increase its fiscal deficit (that is, spend more than it
generates through revenues) or borrow to pay for increased public expenditure on health. 30 The
most recent (May 2011) IMF Article IV consultations note that "Vanuatu's fiscal position is
sound; public debt is low at 20 percent of GDP, and the government deficits have been small for
a number of years." That said, the IMF also urges Vanuatu to safeguard its fiscal position,
particularly in light of shortfalls in government revenue collection, and Vanuatu's vulnerability
to external economic and natural disaster shocks. The IMF Article IV report also states that in
2010, "the fiscal deficit deteriorated to an estimated 2.7 percent of GDP: total revenue excluding
grants shrunk 2.4 percent from 2009, compared with a budgeted increase of 17 percent,
reflecting weaknesses in revenue from both external trade and domestic activity" (IMF, 2011).
4.12 Deficit financing at the macroeconomic level to support increased health
expenditure is a very unattractive option in Vanuatu and is not recommended. There are
several reasons for this position. Prudent deficit financing is appropriate for investments that
generate returns greater than the cost of borrowing, or to make up shortfalls in private
expenditure, neither of which is the case with respect to recurrent health financing in Vanuatu.
Borrowing should usually be used to finance investment, not running costs. Deficit financing
also imposes financial costs on the macroeconomic indicators, and reduces the capacity of
30. In theory, governments also have the option of increased expenditure through inflation by, in effect, printing
money. This, however, is a potentially high-risk approach as inflationary expectations and inflation can become
embedded in the economy with consequent heavy social and economic costs, and is therefore not a recommended
option.
Page 34
government to respond to economic shocks to the system. Even if deficit financing were justified
- and then only in markedly improved macroeconomic circumstances - it could not be
recommended unless there were fundamental and sustained improvements in budget planning
and priority setting, budget control, and public financial management. The most recent
government budget documents express concern that Vanuatu's volatile revenue collection has
meant Vanuatu has incurred fiscal deficits since 2008, and that government has therefore had to
borrow to finance public consumption "in violation of economic theory where agents borrow to
finance productive investments with future positive economic return." The total stock of public
debt is now 19 percent of GDP (Government of Vanuatu, 2012a).
Option 4: Increase the share of government expenditure to health
4.13 In any growing economy, the health sector will receive an increased level of resources,
assuming government tax revenue increases with economic growth, and the health sector's share
of government expenditure stays the same. Government documents confirm that revenue
collections have been volatile over recent years, but that overall public expenditure has been
increasing at an average 8 percent between 2008 and 2011, slightly lower than the average 12
percent between 2004 and 2007 (Government of Vanuatu, 2012a).
4.14 Government could, of course, increase the proportion of funding to the health sector
from the current declining share of 10.4 percent of government appropriations. Arguments
in favor of lifting the share of government health expenditure would include that this would
inject much-needed resources toward well-known, high-priority needs, such as funding for
additional frontline health workers, maintenance budgets, essential drug budgets, and to
strengthen the health information system so that subsequent policy decisions could be made on a
firmer evidence base. Investing an increasing share of total government resources in health now,
particularly in effective primary and secondary promotive and preventive services, would avert,
or at least postpone, increased government expenditure on health in later years. Another
argument in favor of increasing the share of government resources to health, and over the longer
term, would be that this would send an important signal to development partners that their own
financing is additional to, and not simply substituting for, government's own efforts. That, in
turn, could create an environment where longer-term planning and resource reallocation can be
made less volatile over time. Another possible argument is that WHO and UNICEF and many
Sub-Saharan African governments consider a target of 15 percent of government expenditure to
the health sector a useful general target in terms of scaling up nationwide coverage of essential
public sector health interventions, especially maternal and child health (Jarrett & Ofosu-Amaah
S, 1992).
4.15 However it is currently difficult to present a strong business case for increasing the
share of government appropriations to the health sector, and to reverse recent trends, until
a clearer roadmap is in place showing how MoH will make improvements to the efficiency,
effectiveness, and budget control of its existing expenditure. Increasing the share of
government appropriations to health would be more palatable to government if the MoH were
able to demonstrate that such public expenditure is generating the public health benefits that
government expected, and that these are generally greater than other competing needs. This, of
course, is difficult to do in any country, not least because so many factors outside the health
Page 35
sector affect health outcomes, including socioeconomic determinants, genetics, and lifestyle
factors. Nevertheless, a sustained increase in the share of government expenditure to the health
sector will be more convincingly argued by MoH when it shows it is making sustained progress
against the current pattern of expenditure overruns; has plugged the main gaps in the
management information system; is on the way to having a fully costed health sector plan; has a
process for better linking much-needed future health expenditure to the country's national
medium-term expenditure framework; and has an operational plan ready to address absorptive
capacity constraints in those areas most needing additional resources including the rural and
urban poor. Reallocating resources to the health sector is always a zero sum event, with any
increases there being offset by reductions in other sectors. Without evidence of improved
resource allocation and management of existing resources, it is harder to justify significantly
increased shares of government's scarce resources at this particular point.
Option 5: Increasing the call on external resources, or at least making better use of ODA
4.16 External financing for health is already relatively high in Vanuatu. To some extent,
this is to be expected: Vanuatu is a lower-middle-income country eligible for ODA, yet one with
a much smaller population and economy than most other lower-middle-income countries. Hence,
as figure 4.6 shows, the share of external financing for health is almost ten times more in
Vanuatu than it is for other lower-middle-income countries (23.4 percent compared to 2.7
percent in 2011). On the other hand, figure 4.6 also shows that, while external resources as a
share of total expenditure on health are lower in Vanuatu than the average for other Pacific
Island small states, the gap is closing. Vanuatu is now approaching the (otherwise declining)
average of external resources as a percentage of total expenditure on health for all Pacific Island
small states. This is not distinct only to the Pacific: external financing for health in Vanuatu is
also more than twice the share it is in "other small states" (23.4 percent compared to 11.5 percent
in 2010). Furthermore, recent government of Vanuatu statistics, using different definitions, state
that development partners now provide over one-third (VT 890 million out of VT 2.4 billion, or
37 percent) of the total public expenditure budgeted for health in 2012 (Government of Vanuatu,
31
2012f)
31. As stated in footnote 19, these discrepancies can best be resolved during discussions with government of
Vanuatu officials.
Page 36
Figure 4.6 External Resources for Health as Percent Total Expenditure on Health
External resources for health as % total
expenditure on health
40
35
30
25
Per cent total
expenditure on 20
health
15
10
5
0
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
Pacific Island small states
Vanuatu
Other small states
Lower Middle Income Countries
Source: World Bank 2013b.
Note: Pacific Island small states include Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia,
Palau, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu.
Other small states is an aggregate including Bhutan, Botswana, Cape Verde, Comoros, Djibouti,
Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, the Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Lesotho, Maldives, Mauritius, Montenegro,
Namibia, Sao Tome and Principe, Seychelles, Swaziland, and Timor-Leste.
4.17
Of even more importance than the already high share of financing now provided by
development partners is where, how, and why that money is spent. As noted in paragraphs
3.13 onwards of this report, funding from development partners might now be displacing
government's own expenditure on health, rather than being supplemental to it. That is a
dangerous path to follow in terms of public sector health financing, as it provides no real
additional resources to address the pressing health challenges of Vanuatu. It also SOWS the seeds
for diplomatic and foreign relations complications between Vanuatu and its bilateral or
multilateral development partners, few of which can sustain a political defense of providing
scarce aid money to a country that is reducing its own share of expenditure to health, and does
not have any income tax. Furthermore, some recent research suggests that total 32 external aid
from all sources is at, or approaching, the levels where each additional dollar achieves less and
less impact ("diminishing returns") and can actually cause economic harm by driving up prices
for skilled labor and other resources in small island countries, including especially the South
Pacific (Feeny S and McGillivray M, 2008; Foster, 2012). Such findings can be debated: small
island countries with limited opportunities for economic growth and growing populations may
require foreign aid to expand and improve basic health and similar services. On the other hand,
32. It is difficult to obtain a clear picture of the total amount of overseas aid to Vanuatu, particularly as some non-
OECD countries do not necessarily publish the amount of financial assistance they provide.
Page 37
relying on foreign aid can blunt pressures for domestic reform, substitute for government's own
expenditure efforts ("fungibility"), and make government overly dependent on external resources
that can, themselves, become volatile or contract during global economic downturns. What is
clear is that ODA is already a relatively high proportion of public (and therefore total) health
spending in Vanuatu, so its activities, outputs, outcomes, and ultimate impact need to be
proactively assessed and evaluated if intended results are to be achieved.
4.18 Even where external funding is genuinely additional to government's own efforts,
the test of development effectiveness will come from the quality of design and
implementation of activities. At this stage the picture is mixed. A recent surge in external
financing for malaria has been particularly effective at a technical and public health level, but
this appears to have come at the cost of other programs such as dengue control being delayed or
stopped; it also gives mixed messages to government about the need for more efficient resource
management. The coverage and impact of long-term financing for immunization has been
patchy at best. More money is being provided from external sources for HIV and AIDs - there
have been five reported cases and three confirmed AIDS-related deaths in ten years (Government
of Vanuatu, 2013) - than for prevention and treatment of NCDs, which are responsible for 70
percent of all deaths, many of them premature. Some large funding has the virtue of being
flexible and responsive, but, in the absence of firm government budget strategy and cost control,
loses the capacity to be strategic or coherent. Importantly, the largest funder of aid to the health
sector in Vanuatu, AusAID acknowledges in its latest report that, despite progress in some
important areas "as was the case in 2009, it is difficult to adequately assess progress against the
target results" (Australian Government, 2011). The anticipated large (VT 1.62 billion) influx of
capital expenditure for the partial reconstruction of the Vila Central Hospital from another
development partner would seem to run counter to government's own commitment to shift
resources more to primary- and secondary-level services. Experience across the Pacific also
shows that externally funded tertiary hospital construction or refurbishment often leaves a long
tail of increased recurrent costs (electricity bills, air conditioning, new equipment), which have
not been budgeted for or anticipated.
4.19 On the other hand, well-designed and well-implemented aid programs could provide
a key "circuit breaker," buying time for government to implement its own reforms, scale
up essential interventions, and strengthen the health system more broadly. In principle,
quite generous provision of aid to Vanuatu is justified: It is a lower-middle-income country, with
limited scope for rapid economic growth given its size and remoteness, and currently allocates
just $66.72 per person per year, or $1.28 per week, from its own resources on health care. Given
the health challenges Vanuatu faces, there are good reasons for government scaling up financing
for health now, with assistance from a broad range of development partners. More specifically
chapter 2, and other recent reports (Anderson, 2013; World Bank, 2012), note that the
widespread prevalence of risk factors for NCDs is feeding a pipeline of potentially debilitating
and expensive-to-treat diseases such as diabetes, heart disease, stroke, and cancer. Early and
effective primary and secondary prevention at scale for high-risk populations now would have
significant health benefits, and avert, or at least postpone, expenditure on treatment. Government
of Vanuatu as a whole currently has a respectable Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
(CPIA) rating of 4, (where 1 is lowest, 6 is highest) for its quality of budget and financial
management: a rating higher than for other lower-middle-income countries or the Pacific Island
Page 38
small countries. This should instill confidence in development partners that, with effort, MoH
can improve its capacity to the point that it can plan, prioritize, control, and implement its own
and development partners' scarce resources for improved results in the health sector. As is often
the case in the Pacific Islands, actual implementation is critical: many countries have good plans
and strategies, but these fail to get traction due to poor implementation. In Vanuatu's case,
improved implementation needs to focus initially on government capacity, as the private sector,
both for profit and not-for-profit, is small.
4.20 However, the environment for aid delivery must improve substantially to enable any
increased ODA to be fully effective, starting with reforms in government. Paragraph 4.19
above argues that there is a case in principle for increasing ODA to health, given the need.
However in practice this is unlikely to occur - particularly by those development partners who
already provide large amounts of financing - until there is better evidence that what has already
been provided is being used to best effect. A compact needs to be established so that
development partners have confidence their own financing will not substitute for government
financing, and that government's own financing shifts increasingly to reflect its own priorities of
serving the rural and urban poor over the medium to longer term. Government needs to show that
any increased allocations to health are financially affordable and sustainable, and do not put
unnecessary strain on the management of its overall fiscal balances and macroeconomic
environment. Government should demonstrate that it can plan and control budget expenditure
without expenditure overruns, or virements from other key budget line items, such as an
adequately financed maintenance fund. Government needs to have a basic but meaningful health
information system in place, and be able to undertake basic impact evaluations of interventions
so that it, and development partners, can allocate and track the use of scarce resources. (It is hard
to convince ministries of finance and development partners that additional money to health will
be well spent when two-thirds of all health facilities in Vanuatu did not submit their returns in
2010). Development partners provided over one-third (37 percent) of the government health
budget in 2012 (Government of Vanuatu, 2012f), so they should be able to negotiate
improvements to government health expenditure to their own and the government's mutual
benefit.
4.21 Several improvements must also occur on the side of development partners to justify
any increased aid funding. At one end of the spectrum, large, broad-based, flexible financing
agreements must be much more targeted and aligned to government's specific strategies, instead
of loose financing pools that provide stopgap emergency funding for a series of fragmented
activities. At the other end of the spectrum, large, disease-specific, vertical programs should be
sequenced and phased more carefully to ensure they focus much more on high-burden, high-risk
populations, and do not distort or detract from other public sector health priorities during their
own implementation. Vanuatu has been fortunate to receive some very large external financing
for single diseases, including a budget of over VT 222 million for malaria control in 2012 alone.
But despite - or perhaps because of - such large payments, some opportunities may have been
missed to leverage broader and much-needed health system strengthening. Using large disease-
specific funds to have, in effect, a separate and parallel human resources system will not help
strengthen the health system more broadly.
Page
39
4.22 New initiatives provide an opportunity to strengthen health systems more broadly in
Vanuatu. To an extent this is already being done: certain functions such as health promotion,
infrastructure, and reporting systems are being moved back into the Ministry of Health's normal
establishment. However the widespread prevalence of NCDs and their risk factors, as well as the
expected rollout of an NCD "Crisis Response Package" provides an opportunity for Vanuatu to
use what might otherwise be a traditional "vertical disease" approach to leverage broader aspects
of health-system strengthening, including information and referral systems, and budget control.
There are lessons on how to do this, based on the experience globally of scaling up HIV and TB
control (Atun et al., 2013). But there are also risks. Development partners should be careful and
cautious in financing hospital buildings and refurbishments in capital cities, as they can
exacerbate deep existing inequities between rural and urban health access, and impose a long tail
of expensive and often unfunded recurrent costs on governments. Government of Vanuatu has
the authority and leadership capacity to ensure these changes to development partners' practices
occur.
Option 6: Raising specific taxes
4.23 Increasing - and ensuring compliance of - taxation on tobacco is a high priority
and recommended option for Vanuatu because it simultaneously raises revenue for
government while stemming the rise of NCDs. Vanuatu faces two large public policy
challenges in the health sector: How to stem the rise in NCDs, which are responsible for 70
percent of all deaths in Vanuatu; and how to make the financing of its health system more
sustainable. Taxation on tobacco directly - and simultaneously - addresses these two
overarching challenges. It is clear that Vanuatu has a problem with tobacco; government
statistics show that almost half (45 percent) of males smoke tobacco, with the proportion being
highest among those of young working age: 60 percent of 25- to 29-year-olds smoke 33
(Government of Vanuatu, 2009).
4.24 Tobacco use is a particularly important public health and broader development
issue, and so deserves special attention. Tobacco is different from several other products also
known to raise public health concerns if widely consumed, including alcohol, saturated fats, salt,
and sugar. That is because, unlike those other products, there is no "safe" level of consumption
of tobacco. Cigarettes are intentionally made to be addictive; and used as intended, tobacco
consumption causes premature death among approximately 50 percent of its users. WHO notes
that "the tobacco epidemic is one of the biggest public health threats the world has ever faced
nearly 80 percent of the world's one billion smokers live in low- and middle-income countries
Approximately one person dies every six seconds due to tobacco, and this accounts for one in
ten adult deaths
Up to half of current users will eventually die of a tobacco-related disease
Tobacco users who die prematurely deprive their families of income, raise the cost of health
care, and hinder economic development" (WHO, 2012b). Tobacco use is a major risk factor for
heart disease, stroke, and cancer. It exacerbates the problems and complicates the treatments of
other diseases, including diabetes. Money spent on tobacco is money that could have been spent
by households on food and education. Money spent by governments on treating (otherwise
avoidable) tobacco-related diseases is money that could have been spent on roads, education, or
other parts of the health system.
33. Rates of female smoking are low, about 4 percent.
Page 40
4.25 Numerous studies show that raising the price of tobacco is an essential, and
effective, way of reducing consumption of harmful tobacco products, while raising revenue
for governments (Abedian I, Merwe R, Wilkins N, & Jha P, 1998; Beaglehole R et al, 2011; Jha
P et al., 2012; Jha P et al, 2012; WHO, 2010a). Analysis undertaken by Ministry of Finance
officials during WHO Workshops on Tobacco Taxation in Auckland, New Zealand, in June
2012, highlighted the benefits of increasing excise rates on tobacco in the Pacific. For example,
in the case of Samoa and Tonga, it was estimated that raising the excise rate on cigarettes by 50
percent would increase cigarette excise revenue by about 14 and 20 percent per annum,
respectively. This translates into extra excise revenue of VT 3.6 million ($1.58 million) for
Samoa and T$2.5 million ($1.4 million) for Tonga every year. Other studies note the (otherwise
preventable) costs to the health system from tobacco consumption, and compare these to revenue
collected from tobacco to highlight the overall net losses. For example, the average tobacco tax
revenue in the Philippines was estimated to be US$442 million, whereas the estimated health
costs from tobacco use were estimated to range from US$2.8 billion to just over US$6.0 billion
in 2003: health costs outstripping tobacco revenue at least 6 to 1 (Southeast Asia Tobacco
Control Alliance, 2010).
4.26 Raising excise taxes on tobacco, and then maintaining them in real terms, is
administratively easy compared to other ways of raising government revenue, but
compliance must be ensured. The current excise³ on tobacco is VT 4,000 per kilogram, a rate
that has not changed for some time. It is important to maintain the real (adjusted for inflation)
level of excise over time. Ensuring compliance with all aspects of tobacco taxation and
regulation is also a good investment in public health and public revenue: there is anecdotal
evidence that duty-free cigarettes available to the tourist trade are easily accessible to local
residents, and that single stick cigarettes are available on sale. As an island nation, Vanuatu will
have fewer difficulties with smuggling (although it will inevitably have some) than if it were
landlocked with highly porous borders. Any earmarking taxation on tobacco as an additional
source of income for the health sector also sends an important public message, reminding the
community of the adverse links between tobacco and health.
4.27 There will be some criticism about raising tobacco taxes, but these can be managed.
One criticism is that tobacco taxation is regressive, taking more of poorer people's income than
that of the rich. In principle, that is true. However latest research shows that the poor and the
young are more sensitive to price rises, so quit (or do not take up) tobacco smoking at greater
rates than the rich. In fact, far from being regressive, the poor benefit disproportionately over the
medium to longer term by paying less tax (because they quit), yet gaining the health benefits of
avoiding disease (Jha P et al., 2012). Another criticism is that any hypothecated (or
"earmarked") taxation on tobacco directed to the health sector violates good public finance
policy: taxes should be pooled nationally and allocated to their best use rather than to a favored
sector. This is true. However, in a situation like Vanuatu's, where NCDS are prominent and
health financing needs to be made more sustainable, there are arguments for advocating for
raising tobacco taxation, and adding that to the health budget. A third criticism is that tobacco
taxation can damage a legitimate, legal industry, costing jobs. This tends to be an exaggerated
claim (Abedian I et al., 1998; WHO, 2010a). It also ignores the offsetting costs imposed on the
34. In addition to an import duty of 80 percent and a VAT of 12.5 percent.
Page 41
public health system in treating otherwise preventable cancers, heart ailments, and lung disease,
and the likelihood that resources freed up from producing or selling tobacco will be reabsorbed
elsewhere in the economy.
4.28 Government could also consider increasing the excise tax on imported products,
such as sugar-sweetened soft drinks as a public health measure as done recently by the
government of the Cook Islands. That is because consumption of such drinks has few if any
public health benefits; on the contrary, regular consumption increases the likelihood of ill health
and costs to government as the main health provider. As noted in a recent article in The Lancet
"consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages is associated with increased rates of obesity and
diabetes, childhood obesity, long-term weight gain, and cardiovascular disease" (Moodie et al.,
2013). Another article notes that "the odds ratio of becoming obese increased 1.6 times for each
additional sugar-sweetened drink" (Apovian C, 2004).
4.29 Raising the taxes on sugar-sweetened drinks is a relevant public health measure in
Vanuatu. That is because over one-third of 13- to 15-year-old students in Vanuatu usually drink
one or more such drinks per day (WHO, 2011a). Furthermore, Vanuatu has seen an almost three-
fold rise in the value, and a 1.84 rise in the volume, of imported soft drinks since 2006. There is
currently no import duty on sugar-sweetened soft drinks from the main supply source (Fiji) and
no excise duty. Introduction of an excise tax might increase the price of such drinks at the point
of sale, thereby increasing the VAT collected as well. The actual amount collected would depend
upon the price elasticities (unlike addictive products like tobacco, consumers may find it easy to
reduce consumption of sugar-sweetened soft drinks). Similar arguments for moderating, through
taxation, the consumption of foods with little public health benefit but known public health risks
apply in the case of taxes on alcohol and highly processed foods, such as biscuits and cakes or
products with high concentrations of salt or trans fats.
Option 7: Mobilizing revenue through insurance, including social health insurance
4.30 Social health insurance³³ (SHI) has, at least in principle, several advantages in terms
of health financing. In developing countries where the general tax base is small, SHI might be
able to mobilize additional financial resources, depending upon country circumstances. 36
Premiums may also be easier to collect than general taxes because they can be collected directly
by employees. SHI can be a more stable and predictable form of financing, possibly less reliant
on overall business cycles than general taxation, or yearly negotiations with ministries of
finance. SHI can be mildly progressive (wealthier pay proportionately more than poorer) and
redistributive (revenue raised from wealthier people in the formal sector can cross-subsidize
poorer people). SHI can reflect a country's sense of "social solidarity" and concern to ensure
vulnerable people are not excluded from essential care. Carefully designed and implemented,
35. Social health insurance (SHI) is not an easy term to define. However SHI typically involves, or starts, as
compulsory payroll deductions in the formal sector. Those deductions are pooled (as are the health risks) to help
pay certain defined health expenditures, either directly or through third parties. Governments sometimes extend SHI
to those outside the formal sector by, in effect, subsidizing their premiums and contributions ((Gottret P & Schieber
G, 2006)
36. In those special circumstances where there is a reasonably large formal sector that could serve as critical mass
for generating SHI revenues but where, for some political economy or other reasons, income and value-added taxes
are low.
Page 42
SHI can be a vehicle for expanding primary health care, as was the case in Costa Rica in the
1990s, rather than facilitating expansion of hospital-based curative care (Gottret P & Schieber G,
2006; Langenbrunner J & Somanathan A, 2011; Langenbrunner J and Somanathan A, 2011;
Normand C & Weber A, 2009; Roberts M et al., 2008; WHO, 2005, 2010b).
4.31 However, SHI has some important weaknesses, and involves several important
challenges, that make it an unlikely option for Vanuatu for the foreseeable future. SHI
works well when there is a formal sector large enough to mobilize additional revenues and pool
risks. This is not the case in Vanuatu, where the formal sector is very small. 37 Worse, the
existence of compulsory SHI premiums deducted from their salaries may actually discourage
individuals from joining the formal sector: the opposite of government long-term intentions.
Compulsory SHI is also a cost to industry, which, depending upon its level of employment
intensity and the price elasticities of the market it faces, could result in either reduced profits for
the firm or increased costs for consumers. SHI is also, in effect, an earmarked ("hypothecated")
tax on members and employers, which ministries of finance in some countries resist, believing it
preferable to bring all revenues into a central pool. 38 One important study comparing social
health insurance approaches to tax-financed health systems in OECD countries found the
following:
Adopting social health insurance in preference to tax financing increases per capita health
spending by 3 to 4 percent, reduces the formal sector share of employment by 8 to 10
percent, and reduces total employment by as much as 6 percent. For the most part, social
health insurance adoption has no significant impact on amenable mortality, but for one
cause - breast cancer among women - social health insurance systems perform
significantly worse, with 5 to 6 percent more potential years of life lost (Wagstaff A,
2009).
4.32 Perhaps most significantly, SHI involves formidable technical, managerial, actuarial,
and administrative demands even - or perhaps especially - in developing countries.
While acknowledging the benefits and importance of SHI, one study identified fourteen such
substantive challenges to introducing SHI in developing countries (Hsiao W, 2007). These
included the fact that SHI is complicated and implementation takes many years; achieving
universal population coverage has taken decades in most countries; benefit packages must be
explicit and costed carefully; user fees must be in place and must be sufficient to motivate
populations to join SHI voluntarily; stakeholders must be convinced of the actuarial soundness of
SHI; and SHI agencies need to be able to negotiate and implement purchasing and provider
payment mechanisms that ensure delivery of services and goods at minimal cost. Even then, it
37. As noted in the discussion in this chapter on raising income taxes, the Vanuatu National Provident Fund website
states they only had 23,584 active contributing members as of December 31, 2010 (latest date available) and only
3,092 actively contributing employee companies. There were only about 800 business licenses registered to pay
value-added tax in Vanuatu in 2006 - one definition used by government of the "formal" sector. Nearly three-
quarters (73 percent) of households in rural areas had no member working for pay or profit in 2006.
38. They do so because they believe it is better public policy to bring all revenues into a central pool - not reserve
it for the sector in which it was first generated - and then reallocate resources according to national priorities
overall. For the same reason, ministries of finance in some countries resist the idea of hypothecated taxes on
tobacco or alcohol where the revenue is retained in the health sector.
Page 43
may be that SHI premiums are not sufficient to cover health care, and so additional general
taxation or user fees may still be required.
4.33 If those set-up and implementation challenges are met, then there is an additional
challenge in the case of Vanuatu: the more successful a SHI is in Vanuatu in terms of breadth
and depth of coverage, the more demands are likely to be placed on the health system for
curative care. SHI schemes rarely cover promotive or preventive care, but do encourage and
facilitate people to make use of their contributions by accessing the curative health care system.
4.34 For similar reasons - including management and technical complexity - medisave
accounts and private health insurance are more medium- to longer-term alternatives in Vanuatu.
These are useful options to keep under active review by the MoH, but are not likely to yield
significant new and additional resources, or improved health outcomes, in the immediate years,
so are not considered further in this report.
4.35 Community-based health insurance is not a particularly strong option either, given
its history in most developing countries of not being able to raise large additional financing, or
be financially sustainable over the medium term (Gottret P & Schieber G, 2006). Research
suggests some community-based prepayment schemes can increase access³⁹ and equity to health
services in low-income settings, and reduce out-of-pocket payments (Schneider & Diop, 2001).
Research also suggests the origins and eventual success of community-based health insurance is
culturally and context specific. One report notes that "the main reasons so many people choose
not to participate (in community health insurance) are that they do not understand the need for
health insurance, or they do not trust the managers of the scheme" (Gottret P & Schieber G,
2006). One large-scale review concluded the following:
Most community-financing schemes have evolved in the context of severe economic
constraints, political instability, and lack of good governance. Microlevel household data
analysis indicates that community financing improves access by rural and informal sector
workers to needed heath care and provides them with some financial protection against
the
cost
of
illness (and concludes that there are) five key policies available to
governments to improve the effectiveness and sustainability of existing community-
financing schemes. These include (a) increased and well-targeted subsidies to pay for the
premiums of low-income populations; (b) insurance to protect against expenditure
fluctuations and re-insurance to enlarge the effective size of small risk pools; (c) effective
prevention and case management techniques to limit expenditure fluctuations; (d)
technical support to strengthen the management capacity of local schemes; and (e)
establishment and strengthening of links with the formal financing and provider networks
(Preker A et al., 2002).
39. The report notes, "Insurance members report up to five-times higher health service use than nonmembers. The
analysis confirms findings based on provider data: health insurance has significantly improved equity in health
service use for members while at the same time out-of-pocket spending has gone down per episode of illness." That
said, the report also notes "increased health care insurance enrollment is determined by household characteristics
such as the health district of household residence, education level of household head, family size, distance to the
health facility, and radio ownership, whereas health and economic indicators did not influence enrollment."
Page 44
Another large systematic review concluded:
There is strong evidence that community-based health insurance provides some financial
protection by reducing out-of-pocket spending. There is evidence of moderate strength
that such schemes improve cost-recovery. There is weak or no evidence that schemes
have an effect on the quality of care or the efficiency with which care is produced. In
absolute terms, the effects are small and schemes serve only a limited section of the
population. The main policy implication of the review is that these types of community-
financing arrangements are, at best, complementary to other more effective systems of
health financing (Eckman B, 2004).
4.36 While there may be opportunities for small-scale pooling of funds for emergency boat or
truck transport in remote parts of Vanuatu, community-based health insurance is only ever likely
to be a minor strategy for raising revenue and improving access. That is particularly so when the
ability of relatively small, often isolated communities to raise significant resources is limited by
their low-income levels.
Option 8: Increase, or at least rationalize, cost recovery
4.37 Increasing the level of cost recovery, particularly through user fees, has long been
viewed with skepticism among health-financing professionals (Creese A, 1991; Gilson L,
1997; Gottret P & Schieber G, 2006; Lagarde M & Palmer N, 2008; McPake B, 1993). That is
because user fees impose an additional cost that disproportionately affects the poor, unless there
are very carefully targeted exemption mechanisms. Even then, experience suggests that
exemptions are difficult to target properly, or enforce, particularly if those applying the
exemptions lose earnings, or are in a position to extract bribes. User fees could constitute an
additional barrier to accessing health care for the poor, on top of existing barriers (indirect costs
such as transport costs from outlying rural villages, income foregone). There is good evidence in
the US context that even small copayments for drugs to treat chronic diseases lowers patients'
adherence and compliance to treatment (Choudry N, 2009). Flat user fees tend to be regressive,
taking proportionately more from the poorer than the richer members of society. Collecting user
fees has its own administrative costs. User fees have political costs when people are required to
pay them but see no improvement over time in the quality of facilities or services. This suggests
that user fees, if they are to occur, be retained at the point of collection, added to existing
revenue, and then used to improve facilities in ways that customers see and appreciate.
However, once again, this involves a form of hypothecated tax, which ministries of finance are
usually reluctant to endorse. User fees, once established, are also politically hard to maintain in
real terms, and therefore their resource-mobilizing benefits erode over time with inflation.
4.38 On the other hand, user fees are very low in Vanuatu; those that are applied are not
rational from a public sector, health-financing perspective, or equitable. Receipt of user
fees are so low that they do not appear as a separate item in the National Health Accounts
(Government of Vanuatu, 2012d). All hospital beds are in the public sector, and inpatient
services are provided free of charge, irrespective of income or wealth. A fee of VT 200 (less than
$2.00) has been charged for some outpatient department (OPD) services since 2002, and not
updated in that ten-year period, "primarily to act as a disincentive for patients to overuse the
Page 45
services" (Government of Vanuatu, 2012d). In practice fees are waived for OPD treatment of
NCDs at hospitals, but remain in place for communicable and other causes at community health
centers. This is the reverse of what public financing for health would normally predict because
individuals with NCDs have an incentive to pay a reasonable amount to receive treatment, as
they themselves benefit directly. But government has an incentive to keep services free (or even
to pay patients to attend) for treatment of communicable diseases at community health centers to
reduce the spread of such diseases. There is also an equity issue in the current arrangements.
Those NCD patients attending OPDs at a hospital, especially in Port Vila, are generally more
likely to have some source of income to pay the VT 200 fee. However people attending a
community health clinic in rural areas are more likely to be subsistence farmers without ready
access to income. The sometimes voluntary nature of fees further complicates the picture.
4.39 It is also worth noting that Ni-Vanuatu citizens are typically prepared to pay about
ten times the current user fees when they visit a traditional healer. More specifically, the
Vanuatu National Health Account figures show that Ni-Vanuatu citizens paid an average of VT
1,371 for one visit to a traditional healer in 2007 (Government of Vanuatu, 2012d). Discussions
with senior officials from MoH in October 2012 indicate the typical fee for visiting a traditional
healer is now about VT 2,000 per visit, ten times the VT 200 theoretically charged at the OPD or
community health center.
4.40
Getting the balance right with respect to user fees is difficult. Roberts and colleagues
(Roberts M et al., 2008) put the issue of user fees, especially out-of-pocket ones, into some
perspective. On the one hand, they note:
From both risk protection and equity perspectives, out-of-pocket payment is the worst
possible system for health financing. Those who are both sick and poor face the risk of
either untreated disease or impoverishment - or some combination thereof. From the
viewpoint of vertical equity, direct payments are highly regressive, especially given the
correlation of poor health and low income. They are even worse than private insurance,
which at least offers some risk-pooling possibility when there is group purchasing or
when rates are regulated.
4.41
On the other hand, those same authors also make this point:
Providing financial risk protection, however, does not allow the population to avoid all
the costs of health care. In fact, that cannot be done. Foreign aid aside, all health care
costs in a country are ultimately paid for by its citizens - directly or indirectly. It is
simply not possible to protect those in the middle of a country's income distribution
against the costs of routine medical care. If they don't pay those costs directly, they will
do so indirectly via various taxes. What is relevant for achieving risk protection is
helping people avoid the large and unpredictable costs of a serious illness - that is, to
provide a risk-spreading or insurance, where revenues from citizens are pooled and used
to pay for care for those who do get seriously ill.
4.42 The balance between financial protection for its citizens, and citizen's eventual
responsibility for their own health care, is a policy point for government of Vanuatu and
Page 46
MoH ultimately to decide. As Roberts et al. (2008) note above, user fees, especially out-of-
pocket, should clearly not act as a barrier to essential care, or impoverish poor people. Nor
should they increase inequity, or encourage self-medication. On the other hand, some would
argue that neither should a government lean so much in the other direction that virtually all
services are provided "free" or at notional cost to citizens. This might be especially so for
relatively minor, relatively inexpensive curative treatments where the individual could be
expected to share some responsibility for payments. User fees will never make a health system
simultaneously financially self-sufficient and accessible to all those in need. But as countries
develop, there comes a point where notionally "free" services to everyone, including the
wealthier members of society, for virtually all services must be managed and brought into
balance with rising GDP per capita.
4.43 The overarching guiding principle should then be that cost sharing must only be
considered if there is good evidence it will produce significant revenue without causing
detrimental impact on access, equity, and financial protection. Furthermore, some items
should definitely be "free" at the point of delivery for most, if not all, citizens in Vanuatu -
antenatal and birth care, immunizations, family planning advice, infectious disease control, and
screening for NCDs among high-risk groups. Indeed, there is a case for paying poorer people,
through conditional cash transfers, to fully immunize their children, attend antenatal care visits
earlier in pregnancy, and adopt targeted preventive measures against NCDs and other high-cost
diseases.
Option 9: Increased efficiency
4.44 WHO recently estimated that 20 to 40 percent of global health spending is currently
lost through inefficiency and waste. The report identifies ten leading sources of inefficiency in
health. These include purchasing practices for medicines (underuse of generics, use of
substandard or counterfeit medicines, irrational prescribing policies); misaligned incentives (fee
for service payments); management practices (medical errors, costly staffing mixes); and poor
investment decisions (hospital size and technology choices) (WHO, 2010b). Further details,
including the underlying sources of inefficiency and ways to respond are in annex 3 of this
report.
4.45 Improving efficiency is potentially the greatest source of increased resources and
improved health outcomes for Vanuatu. It relies on the relatively simple but appealing
argument that Vanuatu could do more with the scarce resources - financial, human, and
management - that it already has, as a foundation for then drawing in additional resources over
time. In improving technical and allocative efficiency⁴ Vanuatu would not necessarily have to
raise extra taxes or provide more resources to the health system straight away. Rather, it would
generate increased - and possibly more equitable - outcomes from existing resources. In doing
so, it would relieve pressure on the government's overall budget, and help make health financing
40. A simple explanation of the difference between these two concepts is that technical efficiency is doing things
right, allocative efficiency is doing the right things. That is, technical efficiency seeks to get the maximum possible
given output - number of hip replacements, for example - for a given mix of doctors, nurses, and equipment.
Allocative efficiency, on the other hand, seeks to drive a higher level of health outcomes by reallocating scarce
resources to where they are likely to have the biggest (or most equitable) impact. See Liu 2003 for further details.
Page 47
more sustainable. It would have the added benefit that the MFEM and development partners will
be more, not less, willing to support MoH efforts if they are convinced existing resources are
used efficiently and equitably for better quality health services. Improving technical and
allocative efficiency is therefore not only valuable in its own right - helping to achieve a
"bigger bang for the (existing) buck" - it can also lay the groundwork for helping "crowd in"
additional financing from government and development partners. Improving technical and
allocative efficiency is so important that the following practical steps are suggested as a practical
way of moving forward.
Invest in information for evidence-based decision making
4.46 A first-order priority to improve efficiency and effectiveness of scarce resources
would be to invest in strengthening the evidence base for decision making, including
through improved information systems. MoH and its development partners do not have a
strong enough evidence base for making best use of their existing resources. As noted in chapter
1, only one-third of health facilities - frontline in health service delivery - submitted a report
in the latest year. MoH is therefore operating in the dark in terms of inputs, activities, outputs,
and outcomes for the majority of the population. Furthermore, neither the government nor its
development partners can confidently state the outcomes of its support.
4.47 MoH has a vision for strengthening the senior leadership level of the ministry, which
has implications for strengthening the evidence base for decision making. In principle,
strengthening the senior leadership level makes sense: good leadership and management is a key
ingredient in managing a challenging health system. But the business case for increasing the
numbers, levels, and salaries of senior officials assumes that there is a sufficient evidence base
that senior managers can use to make informed decisions, and then be held accountable for
outputs and specified outcomes.⁴¹ At present, this is simply not the case. Any expansion of
senior levels should be tied very closely to the prior improvement of the evidence base on which
informed choices can then be made. Whatever the outcome of restructuring proposals in MOH,
the senior leadership team needs to prioritize - and to be seen as prioritizing - the active use,
and where needed, refinement of existing monitoring and evaluation systems. Calling for and
critically assessing relevant monitoring and evaluation reports should be a regular part of the
decision-making culture, including in the ongoing planning and budgeting cycle. This approach
needs to start with the senior management team and then flow down throughout the system.
Shift financial and management resources to frontline services to address high burdens among
the rural and urban poor
4.48 A key priority is to shift financial and management resources to frontline services to
address high burdens among the rural and urban poor. This is a well-known and
longstanding challenge in Vanuatu, particularly as Vila Central Hospital increasingly becomes a
center of gravity for health financing and resources. Redressing that trend has long been part of
41. MoH officials cannot be ultimately responsible for most health outcomes, and virtually no impact as many of the
determinants of health outcomes and impact lie outside the health sector, including genetics, lifestyle factors,
education levels, and access to improved water and sanitation. However, they can be responsible for how they
manage and use scarce resources for the maximum benefit of the population.
Page 48
government policy. However as figure 3.1 shows (repeated below), the share of government's
own appropriations to community health centers, most of which are in rural areas, has changed
little in the last six years. In fact while the absolute amount of appropriation has increased
between 2006 and 2012 (from VT 231.2 to VT 323.6 million) the relative share of government's
appropriation to community health centers has fallen (from 21.6 to 19.2 percent). The fact that
development partners may have increased their allocations to community health centers and rural
service delivery is not a satisfactory explanation when it is government's own policy to give
increasing focus to these underserved areas. Figure 3.1 is repeated below for ease of reference
Figure 3.1 Ministry of Health Expenditure Trends Using Government-Appropriated
Resources
MOH expenditure from Government
appropriations
2,000,000,000
1,800,000,000
1,600,000,000
1,400,000,000
1,200,000,000
Vatu (current)
1,000,000,000
800,000,000
600,000,000
400,000,000
200,000,000
-
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
Original appropriation
Actual expenditure
Hospital Services
Of which VCH
Planning and Administration
Community Health Services
Purchase of drugs
Source: Government of Vanuatu 2012.
4.49
Government is considering some practical options for making such shifts to
frontline services, but this needs to be managed well, and monitored proactively, to avoid
unintended consequences. For example, 17 doctors trained in Cuba and elsewhere will be
returning to Vanuatu in 2015, and a further 25 doctors will return in 2016 at a cost of VT 45
million and VT 55 million per annum, respectively. Government has decided to deploy the
majority of doctors to local health centers in keeping with its policy of decentralizing services.
This is a potentially significant and strategic addition to frontline services. Well managed, it
Page 49
could also alleviate the overcrowding at Vila Central Hospital: Government says there are on
average only two doctors serving in the outlying provinces, so many patients feel compelled to
go to Port Vila if they can afford it. The effectiveness, efficiency, and equity goals requires that
returning overseas-trained doctors can acquire more practical experience through internships; are
supervised well on return; stay in rural and remote locations; and are able to conduct outreach
services. Government would be well advised to also test for any unintended consequences that
could undermine public health or drive up costs. Unintended consequences might include a surge
in diagnostic testing and prescribing of drugs from doctors that could overwhelm the
government's health budget. Returning doctors might also unintentionally displace or demoralize
existing (and cost-effective) nurse practitioners and midwives working in rural and remote areas.
Government has prudently decided to review the overall effectiveness and efficiency of the
current scheme before sending further cohorts overseas for training.
4.50 There are other practical opportunities for government to assess and promote the
decentralization of services to rural and remote areas. A Provincial Resources Review is being
conducted from May to August 2013, which will assess not just the availability of physical assets
across the country, but also identify who is working at each dispensary and facility, and their
qualifications. Linking that review to government's needs assessment of the "best buys" for
preventing NCDs across the country would provide a good evidence base for targeting those
communities with high health burdens but inadequate resources. Furthermore, in the preparation
of the 2014 budget, MOH intends to move away from its traditional practice of allocations based
purely on past historical norms. Instead, more consideration
will be given to allocating resources based on changing
population trends, availability or absence of facilities, and other
Box 4.1
similarly more rational criteria. Senior officials consider this
Primary prevention, secondary
might permit increased allocations and expenditure in the
prevention, and primary health
northern island groupings of Vanuatu, where the majority of
care: what do the terms mean?
the population live.
Primary prevention aims to
prevent the occurrence of a
Invest in primary and secondary prevention
disease in the first place.
Secondary prevention involves
early treatment or management of
4.51 A second priority for improving efficiency and
a disease once it has arisen to
effectiveness of scarce resources is to invest more in
reduce or postpone subsequent
deterioration and complications.
primary and secondary prevention. Chapter 2 of this report
Primary health care is the first
shows that undernutrition, including stunting, is surprisingly
level of care or entry level to the
high in Vanuatu. Immunization rates for measles have been low
formal health system. The
primary health care setting,
and volatile. The latest WHO NCD STEPS survey confirms
including rural aid posts and
that Vanuatu, like many other Pacific Island countries, has a
health clinics, provides a good
high prevalence of risk factors for acquiring NCDs: only about
mechanism for primary and
secondary prevention of NCDs
5 percent of adult women have no risk factor for acquiring an
through screening for high blood
NCD, the cause of approximately 70 percent of deaths in
pressure; risk factors for diabetes;
Vanuatu(WHO, 2012c). Preliminary analysis from the World
advice on diet, exercise, and
tobacco cessation; and dispensing
Bank and MoH suggests that the government would avert
of basic drugs, such as aspirin
projected expenditure of about VT 45,000 ($500) just in
and statins. This would
pharmaceutical costs for every person who, through diet and
complement and extend the
traditional role of primary health
exercise, avoided becoming a diabetic patient requiring insulin.
care in preventing and treating
communicable diseases, and
providing antenatal and maternal
Page 50
care.
There are major strategic gains in terms of health benefits and savings to government arising
from effective primary and secondary prevention (see Box 4.1 describing these terms).
4.52 Yet the current health system focuses on efforts at curative treatment, often in
hospitals, more so than prevention of diseases in the first place. According to Vanuatu's
National Health Accounts, inpatient curative care absorbed 30 percent of government health
expenditure in 2007; outpatient curative care absorbed a further 32 percent. Prevention and
public health services absorbed 11 percent, and prevention of NCDs absorbed just 2.2 percent of
government expenditure (Government of Vanuatu, 2011b). The Public Expenditure Review
Health 2011 found that combined spending on NCD prevention was only VT 1.6 million, or 0.6
percent of total public health allocation. (Government of Vanuatu, 2012e )
4.53 More recent figures suggest that the allocation to the Public Health Program - the locus
for prevention - has risen slightly in nominal terms in the years between 2006 and 2012 (from
VT 50.7 million to VT 60.2 million) but actually fallen from 4.7 percent of government
appropriations to just 3.5 percent over the same period. Vanuatu has a good written policy on
combating NCDs (Government of Vanuatu, 2010). But financial and human resources do not
appear to necessarily align well with the strategy. For example, as seen in figure 4.7, utilizing
community health centers in NCD prevention is not in the top ten budget items for the NCD
strategy, even after removing the one-off (and well-justified) expenditure on the NCD STEPS
survey.
Figure 4.7 Rank Order of Expenditure Priorities of the National Policy and Strategy for
NCDs
Million Vatu (2010-2015)
0
10
20
30
40
50
STEPS survey
Two NCD centres (Vila and Luganville)
Increase and improve sports facilities
Reduce use of marijuana
School healthy eating
School nutrition, hygiene, food safety
Budget in Million Vatu (2010-2015)
Tobacco use surveillance
Tobacco awareness
Increase participation in sport and
Workforce capacity on nutrition
NCD risk assessment protocols all
Utilise CHCs in NCD prevention
National oral health survey
Source: Government of Vanuatu 2010.
Page 51
4.54 Development of a Health Promotion Foundation is a potentially good investment,
but needs to be well designed and monitored if it is to be cost-effective compared to
alternatives. Investing in health promotion and prevention is justified on both public health and
public finance grounds in Vanuatu, given the overall level of risk factors for communicable and
NCD diseases, and maternal/newborn complications. Government is considering the
establishment of a Health Promotion Foundation. This could be a good option, although
integrating health promotion messages within primary health care provision at the periphery of
the health system may be a more cost-effective option than any new, stand-alone, additional
Health Promotion Foundation based in Port Vila. Whatever option is chosen, international
experience suggests that it is often difficult to improve healthy lifestyle choices⁴² of individuals
just through public awareness and health promotion campaigns. Government would be well
advised to carefully monitor and evaluate the cost-effectiveness of various approaches to health
promotion to ensure it is achieving intended results and an acceptable level of value for money.
Be strategic about human resources
4.55 Salaries and allowances are a major driver of cost overruns in the MoH budget, yet
there are simultaneously major gaps in frontline health workers. Financing for health
workers involves something of a paradox in Vanuatu. On the one hand, there is clearly a current
shortage⁴³ of trained health workers delivering essential services (paragraph 4.56). On the other
hand, it is also clear that salaries are a large - and increasing - share of the health budget.
Personnel costs amounted to more than VT 1 billion ($11.2 million) in 2012. This was more than
two-thirds (67 percent) of the total MOH health budget appropriated by government, the highest
proportion it has reached in the last five years with 33 percent left for operations (Government of
Vanuatu, 2013). Senior MOH officials advised during April 2013 that after payment of salaries,
there were often insufficient operational funds left to pay for airfare to outer islands for
supervision missions or other essential tasks. Furthermore, there is approximately VT 700
million ($7.6 million) due to clear a backlog of outstanding retirements from the MOH, a
financial and personnel blockage that is also hindering workforce renewal, including the hiring
of new nurses. Figure 4.8 below shows that salaries have been on a generally rising trend, driven
largely by expenditures at the Vila Central Hospital (VCH). The Ministry of Health has recently
commissioned an independent audit of the payment of allowances and overtime at VCH to verify
if these rapidly growing source of cost overruns are justified - and even legitimate in some
cases.
42. Often summarized as "SNAP": reducing risk factors of smoking, nutrition, alcohol, and physical inactivity.
43. There will be 17 doctors trained overseas returning to Vanuatu in 2015 and a further 25 returning in 2016.
Page 52
Figure 4.8 MoH Total Salaries Expenditure, Including VCH
1,200,000,000
1,000,000,000
800,000,000
600,000,000
Central Hospital Payroll
MoH Total Payroll
400,000,000
200,000,000
0
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Source: Government of Vanuatu 2012.
4.56 At the same time, however, there are critical shortages of frontline health workers,
including in rural areas. WHO suggests that a country like Vanuatu should have, at a minimum,
about 2.3 doctors, nurses, and midwives per 1,000 population: the current rate is probably 1.77
per 1,000. That suggests the total number of doctors, nurses, and midwives should increase over
time as budget circumstances permit. But it would also be important to ensure that existing salary
allocations for the MOH are used as much as possible on frontline service delivery, including
especially primary and secondary prevention of communicable diseases and NCDs in outlying
areas. At present, MoH has a total estimated workforce of approximately 1,261, of which 46
were medical practitioners (3.6 percent), 62 were midwives (4.9 percent), 206 were village
health workers (16.3 percent), and 335 were nurses (26.5 percent). Thus, even if every one of
these workers were involved in direct service provision to patients (which they are not, as quite a
number take administrative roles), only about half (51 percent) of the total MoH workforce are
delivering frontline health services. A recent report (Roberts & Lin S, 2012) summarizes the
situation as follows:
The main HRH problem is the severe and critical health worker shortages. Vanuatu has
the third-lowest health workforce densities in the Pacific region, with only Papua New
Guinea and the Solomon Islands having fewer health workers per capita. The greatest
shortages are in rural areas as the distribution of health workers is not equitable across the
country. An ageing workforce and insufficient production of health workers are the main
causes of these shortages, rather than migration or resignations. It is estimated that 40
health workers are retiring each year, half of whom are nurses, and there are not enough
graduates to replace them. The nursing workforce faces the most severe shortages. It is
thought that for every two nurses who retire, just one is replaced. There is a shortage of
local specialist skills, with many of these specialist gaps filled by foreign workers.
Page
53
4.57 The 42 doctors returning from overseas training is one catalyst for more strategic
investments. Government intends to allocate many of the doctors returning from overseas
training in 2015 and 2016 to regional, rural, and primary care clinics. If successful (see
paragraph 4.49), this would help make more strategic use of the health work force, and improve
equity. It could also help to set in train a "virtuous circle" that could help strengthen the business
case for government (and development partners) to provide additional financing to MOH. For
example, more frontline health workers delivering effective services in rural and remote areas
might alleviate the need for the sick to present at Vila Central Hospital, thereby reducing
congestion and expensive treatments. Supporting frontline health services in rural areas and
remote islands also provides employment opportunities for nurses and doctors, and improves
equity of access to essential health services. Such developments would be seen as delivering on
government's long-standing vision of decentralizing health services, and would provide visible
evidence of government's capacity to provide essential services. That, in turn, might provide
"political space" to increase the fiscal space for MOH over time.
4.58 Having effective, stable leadership within MOH is also an important strategic
investment. MOH needs stable leadership at the top if it is to effectively address the many
challenges it faces. (There have been three changes in director general of MOH in the last year).
MOH is also considering restructuring the top levels of the MOH. Having a strong and effective
leadership team is obviously important. On the other hand, a ministry with an approved total
establishment of 998 personnel, and a government keen to decentralize service delivery, will
wish to avoid a top-heavy structure.
Invest in public financial management and cost control
4.59 MoH needs to increase expenditure on health, but the business case for doing so is
weakened when public financial management and cost control are weak. As noted in chapter
3, MoH expenditure has exceeded initial appropriations in every year since 2006 except one year
(2007). Government itself is aware from existing recent reports on the other challenges in public
financial management (Government of Vanuatu, 2011c, 2012e ; Whimp K, 2010). The
persistence of such challenges erodes the confidence of government ministries and of
development partners in providing additional financing to MoH.
Invest in maintenance of existing - and future - assets
4.60 Few if any resources are invested in maintenance of existing - and often critical
and expensive - capital assets. The National Health Accounts makes one mention
(Government of Vanuatu 2012d, p21) of the importance of maintaining assets through adequate
recurrent expenditure, but does not capture any actual financial figures of sources and uses of
maintenance (Government of Vanuatu, 2012d). The MoH budget does not have a specific line
item for maintenance. There is no accounting provision for the depreciation of capital assets
(buildings, vehicles, medical equipment). A costing study of the Vila Central Hospital (VCH)
found that the repairs and maintenance budget for this 38-year-old key facility should be about
VT 9.5 million per year, but that the actual funding was VT 0.6 million. The line item budget for
repairs and maintenance was 2 percent of the total annual budget for VCH, or 0.7 percent of the
Page 54
total value of fixed assets. What little had been set aside for repairs and maintenance at VCH was
used for other purposes, including freight charges (Keane C, 2011).
4.61 Low priority for repairs and maintenance is common across the Pacific, with serious
consequences for both public sector health and public finances. Critical equipment is
unreliable, especially during peak load periods such as during natural disasters. Expensive and
life-saving drugs are spoiled because of the failure of basic cold chain refrigeration. Expensive
capital equipment, including medical equipment and vehicles, do not see out their full economic
life, so the original investment is wasted. Scarce government and development partner funding is
then used to replace equipment earlier than would otherwise be necessary.
4.62 Poor maintenance imposes both direct and indirect costs. Direct costs include the
replacement of facilities and equipment sooner than would otherwise be the case. Other costs are
more indirect: rural villagers may understandably walk past run-down and dilapidated rural
clinics, and go directly to (higher-cost) secondary and tertiary clinics, imposing high (but hidden)
costs on the public sector health system. Development partners are key players in this. At one
extreme, development partners can provide supply-driven hospital refurbishments that then put
potential and unexpected pressure on government's recurrent budget for electricity and
maintenance. (Government of Vanuatu would be well advised to have a full and clear
understanding of the recurrent cost implications of expected refurbishment of VCH before too
much work is done.) At the other extreme, development partners can become frustrated with the
"build, deteriorate, rebuild" cycle of aid projects and reduce their funding to the sector or the
country.
Invest in trialing innovative service-delivery options, including outsourcing, and carefully
monitor outcomes and possible impact
4.63 The urgency in addressing health sector challenges and the tight budgetary situation
of MoH combine to create strong reasons that trialing innovative options for service
delivery should be considered. Health service delivery is dominated by government purchasing
and provision, with virtually no competition. Yet there are clearly financial, workforce, and
capacity constraints in delivering essential services to the rural and urban poor. There is little
rigorous program or impact evaluation to assess if government programs are achieving the right
outcomes, for the right people, at the right price.
4.64 International experience suggests well-conducted trials can generate rapid, efficient,
equitable, and affordable health outcomes. There are many options that governments have
used to trial more innovative service delivery, including outsourcing, changes in provider
payments (capitation, fee for service, performance bonuses, pay for performance), and
"scorecards." One systematic review of ten rigorously assessed experiments, including one
island country (Haiti), in contracting (both outsourcing and insourcing) with NGOs, found that
there had been impressive improvements in effective primary health care and nutrition services,
achieved rapidly. The study found the impact was greatest in those interventions that are easier to
change, including immunization, vitamin A, and antenatal coverage: issues that are important in
Vanuatu (Loevinsohn B & Harding A, 2005).
Page 55
4.65 One well-conducted, and well-publicized, study shows that contracting models can
simultaneously improve access, outputs, efficiency, and equity, even in low-income settings
such as Cambodia( (Bhushan I, Keller S, & Schwartz B, 2002). Conditions in Cambodia are, of
course, very different from those in Vanuatu, and it cannot be assumed the outputs and outcomes
achieved there would necessarily occur in Vanuatu. Nevertheless, there are some interesting and
important underlying principles that emerge and could be broadly relevant in Vanuatu. Key
findings from that study are as follows:
Contracted-out districts experienced an impressive increase in the use of reproductive
health services, where, for example, coverage of antenatal care increased by more than
400 percent, compared to contracted-in and control districts where coverage rose by 233
and 160 percent, respectively. Success in the coverage of child health services also
followed a similar pattern. Immunization rates increased in contracted-out districts by
158 percent, in contracted-in districts by 82 percent, and in control districts by 56
percent.
The evaluation survey measured the productive time lost due to illness by patients and
their caretakers. The results showed that on an average, people in contracted-out districts
lost about 15 percent less time on illness and seeking health care compared to control
districts. People in contracted-in districts lost about 5 percent less. Thus, the results
suggest that contracting-out, besides being cost-effective, is also the most efficient option
for providing health care services.
The evaluation study shows, furthermore, that the contracted districts provided more than
proportionate benefits to the poor. Much of the increase in health care utilization in
contracted districts was attributable to the increased use of services by households of low
socioeconomic status. For example, use of curative health services at district hospitals by
the bottom half of the socioeconomic group increased about twelve-fold in contracted-out
districts and six-fold in contracted-in districts in 2.5 years. The corresponding increase in
the control districts was considerably less than double. The poor benefited more than
proportionately in the contracted-out districts because of the improved accessibility of
health services in villages, where most poor people live. The reduction in costs of health
services also raised the demand for health services by the poor. (Bhushan I et al., 2002)
4.66 Of course, contracting and impact evaluations involve their own costs in terms of
financing and management time. They also require good contract management skills, both
within MoH and within NGOs, both of which are in relatively short supply in Vanuatu. On the
other hand, the urgent need to expand coverage and improve quality of service delivery in
Vanuatu in the face of the health challenges summarized in chapter 2, and the current constraints
within MoH, summarized in chapter 3, suggest that some alternatives need to be looked at and
trialed. Development partners are well placed to assist government in this. Investing in
innovative trials and impact evaluations, generate valuable insights and "knowledge products"
whether the interventions "work" or not.
4.67
Whatever lessons are generated will strengthen the evidence base for future policy
and programming choices, not just in Vanuatu but also for other countries in the region.
Page 56
Development partners have a particularly strong incentive to support and demonstrate "results"
from their aid expenditure, and are well placed to finance trials and experiments, thereby taking
on some of the (acceptable) program risk. Development partners can also act as catalysts,
bringing together reputable, experienced externally based NGOs and helping them partner with
smaller local NGOs. Development partners are also well placed to finance independent impact
evaluations of alternative and innovative interventions in service delivery.
4.68 One practical and low-cost trial that would shed light on allocative and technical
efficiency in Vanuatu would be to monitor and evaluate differing provider payment
systems for primary prevention of high-burden communicable and noncommunicable diseases.
For example, a carefully conducted and monitored trial could assess whether capitation payments
to doctors (and nurses) are more cost-effective in increasing immunization rates and NCD
screening than traditional salary payments. The multiple islands in Vanuatu would also allow
rigorous, yet ethical, 44 randomized controlled experiments.
44. As all communities would still be eligible to receive the services: the only variation would be in the forms of
payment to the providers.
Page 57
CONCLUSION
4.69 Vanuatu faces important public health challenges that can undermine social and
economic growth and development gains made to date. Those health challenges come from a
rapidly growing population and its increased demands on maternal and child health services; an
unfinished agenda of controlling communicable diseases and undernutrition; and a rapid rise in
NCDs, such as diabetes and heart disease. The demographic profile of Vanuatu exacerbates these
challenges. Growing numbers of young women entering reproductive age cohorts increases the
need for maternal, newborn, and child health services. At the same time, increasing numbers of
people are ageing, which, combined with the high prevalence of risk factors, is creating a surge
of NCDs and premature deaths.
4.70 Vanuatu also faces important health-financing challenges, particularly for
government, which funds the vast majority of health care. On the one hand, per capita public
expenditure from government's own appropriated resources is low in absolute and relative terms,
about VT 6,122 or $66.72 per person per year in 2012. The share of government appropriations
to health has also been falling, from over 12.0 percent in 2004 to 9.8 percent in 2013. Per capita
real (adjusted for inflation) appropriations from government have been flat and are now falling.
4.71 On the other hand, Vanuatu does not have easy options for increasing government
expenditure on health: economic growth is muted and volatile; tax and other revenue
collections are low in absolute and relative terms. Government already relies heavily on
development partners to supplement (and in some cases possibly substitute for) government's
own expenditure on health. By some measures, development partners are already providing over
one-third (37 percent) of total public expenditure. But the business case for rapidly or
significantly increased financial support from development partners is weakened, particularly
when the information and evidence base for making good policy choices is patchy or missing
(two-thirds of health centers were not able to submit their basic information returns in 2011) and
key aspects of public financial management are weak. While development partners are a
potentially important part of the solution to health challenges in Vanuatu, the key responses must
come from government itself.
4.72 It is against this background that this report identified nine options that could, at
least in principle, help put Vanuatu's health financing onto a more effective, efficient,
equitable, affordable, and sustainable trajectory. The nine options canvassed were (1)
relying on broader economic growth; (2) increasing government expenditure via higher general
taxation; (3) increasing government expenditure via deficit financing; (4) increasing the share of
government expenditure to health; (5) increasing external and donor financing; (6) increasing
specific taxes; (7) mobilizing additional nongovernment resources via insurance (including social
health insurance, community, and private insurance); (8) increasing cost-recovery measures; and
(9) increasing efficiency.
4.73 The analysis shows that the most practicable and immediate option is for Vanuatu
to make better use of its present resources by improving efficiency. While raising taxes on
tobacco is a recommended option that could be applied quickly (option 6 above), the most
strategic option would be to improve efficiency of existing public expenditure. This, in turn,
Page 58
would involve reallocating government and development partners' resources to those
interventions that would make the largest, most equitable, and sustainable impact on high-burden
health impacts, especially among the rural and urban poor. That would then, more likely than any
of the other options, set in train a "virtuous circle" of improved expenditure patterns that could
"crowd in" further financing from government and development partners. Several specific areas
for improving the allocative and technical efficiency of public expenditure were explored in this
paper, and would each contribute to broader health systems effectiveness and service delivery.
These can be summarized as follows:
Invest in information for evidence-based decision making. Only one-third of health
facilities - frontline in health service delivery - submitted a report in the latest year.
MoH is therefore operating in the dark in terms of inputs, activities, outputs, and
outcomes for the majority of the population. The major development partner (AusAID) is
not able to say with confidence the outcomes of its support.
Shift financial and management resources to frontline services to address high
burdens among the rural and urban poor. Hospitals play an important part in health
service delivery. But they now absorb nearly half of total appropriated expenditure, and
twice the share going to community health centers, including in rural areas where the
majority of poorer people live. The drug budget has remained flat for many years.
Invest in primary and secondary prevention. The MoH would avert otherwise required
expenditure of about VT 45,000 ($500) in pharmaceutical costs alone for every diabetes
patient that could be stabilized through effective primary and secondary prevention early
in the disease and did not have to move to an insulin regime. However, prevention of
NCD absorbed a mere 0.6 percent of government expenditure on health in
2011. (Government of Vanuatu, 2012e
Be strategic about human resources. Salaries and allowances are a major driver of cost
overruns in the MoH budget, yet there are simultaneously major gaps in frontline health
workers. Only about half (51 percent) of the total MoH workforce is delivering frontline
health services. There is only one full-time officer responsible for Integrated
Management of Childhood Illnesses. There is a pronounced need for additional nurses,
nurse practitioners, and midwives. MOH needs continued effective, stable leadership.
Invest in public financial management. Regular and large expenditure overruns on
salaries, allowances, drugs, and hospitals undermine the credibility of planning, and
reduce the confidence of other parts of the Vanuatu government and development
partners in providing future additional funds to MoH.
Invest in maintenance of existing - and future - assets. Investment in preventive
and routine maintenance is not captured by the National Health Accounts, or the main
annual budget statement for MoH. What little is budgeted for maintenance is not enough
to keep expensive capital assets in good repair. The line item budget for repairs and
maintenance at the Vanuatu Central Hospital was 2.0 percent of the total annual budget
for VCH, or 0.7 percent of the total value of fixed assets.
Invest in trialing innovative service-delivery options, and carefully monitor
outcomes and possible impact. The urgency of the public health challenges, and the
severity of the public financing constraints, means that MoH should trial a range of
innovative service-delivery options. Contracting with NGOs is one possibility that has led
to rapid and sustained impacts in other comparable countries, although that in itself will
Page 59
require good contract management skills within MoH and NGOs: areas where
development partners could be helpful. Investing in impact evaluation is essential for
insight into the public health effects and value-for-money aspects of existing public
expenditure. Trialing different approaches to provider payments would be a good start.
4.74 The analysis also concluded that development partners play an important role too.
At one end of the spectrum, large, broad-based, flexible financing agreements need to be more
targeted and aligned to government's specific strategies, instead of loose financing pools that
provide stopgap emergency funding for a series of fragmented activities. At the other end of the
spectrum, large, disease-specific, vertical programs should be sequenced and phased more
carefully to ensure they focus much more on high-burden, high-risk populations, and do not
distort or detract from other public health priorities during their own implementation. Large
externally funded resources for disease-specific interventions should have more explicit and
proactive plans for strengthening the health system more broadly, including the management of
information, health workers, finances, the referral system, and service delivery. Development
partners should also be careful and cautious in financing hospital buildings and refurbishments in
capital cities, as that can exacerbate existing deep inequities between rural and urban health
access, and impose a long tail of expensive and often unfunded recurrent costs on governments.
4.75 The World Bank takes this opportunity to thank the government of Vanuatu and
development partners for discussions and insights in preparing this report. The World Bank
stands ready to assist the government of Vanuatu in moving forward on the reform agenda.
Page 60
ANNEX 1: STATEMENT BY VANUATU'S MINISTRY OF HEALTH ON
THE CHALLENGES IT FACES
The following is an extract from the Ministry of Health Annual Report, published in June 2012.
The following have been the major challenges of the Ministry of Health in 201
1.
Weak Health System
(a) Human resources - The ministry has a huge gap/shortfall in human resources. Further to
the gaps, many staff are in of retirement age, and many more have medical conditions that
warrant them to leave the Public Services. 2011 financial allocation was not adequate to pay out
the retirees and finding adequate resource now for their retirement package is a priority.
(b) Financial management - The issue of finance was a major cause of many services not
being delivered according to plans and needs. The ministry annual government budget has seen
no increase for some years now. This affected some vital services like purchasing utility bills,
drugs, and oxygen gas supply. This is further aggravated by the increased cost in goods and
services. Delay in payment of services provided to MoH (for example, electricity bills). Some
issues attached to this challenge are the smart stream network, which many times does not work,
poor management of health finances, and Information Technology problems. Further, finance
provincial health officers are not connected with the smart stream network system. The process
of financial management is an area to work on.
(c) Health Information - The MoH Health Information System is not functioning up to its
capacity. With this problem, accurate data needed for planning, policy and decision making are
difficult to obtain. This area has been identified for improvement, and 2011 has seen huge steps
taken to address this.
(d) Leadership/Management - In order for health service to function properly, health
managers must pose good leadership and management skills. This is lacking in the MoH
especially in the managerial positions. The MoH has to overcome this challenge to make real
progress in the future. The position of director general has gone through many challenges in
2011 with many changes that were not healthy for proper administering of the ministry.
2. Resources Allocation - The Ministry of Health gets a very small proportion of the National
Budget and it has not increased for some years now. This does not reflect the need for health
services that the people of Vanuatu want. 2011 has seen a further decrease of the budget
compared to 2010. Resources are mostly allocated heavy top down, which does not align itself to
the concept of the Primary Health Care approach and role delineation to provincial levels. The
challenge is always there and that is to reverse the resource allocation and make it heavy bottom
up because that is where 80 percent of the services are where people live.
3. Double burden of diseases - The epidemiological trend in Vanuatu has seen changes in
lifestyles, which has [seen an] increase in noncommunicable diseases (NCDs), a shift from
communicable diseases, which resulted in what we now see as a double burden of diseases in
Vanuatu (both infectious and NCDs). This is having immense pressure on the MoH resources
utilization.
4. Geographical location of facilities and communities - Many communities and health
facilities are located in remote locations in Vanuatu, which makes communication and
transportation difficult to reach.
Page 61
5. Natural Disasters - Vanuatu as a disaster-prone country will continue to be stretched from
its limited health resources when disaster strikes.
Page I 62
ANNEX 2: HEALTH EXPENDITURE STATISTICS FOR VANUATU COMPARED TO OTHER LARGER
PACIFIC ISLAND COUNTRIES, 2010
Country
Total
General
Private
General
External
Out-of-
Per capita
Per capita
Per capita
Per capita
expenditure
government
expenditure
government
resources for
pocket
total
total
government
government
on health as
expenditure
on health as
expenditure
health as
expenditure
expenditure
expenditure
expenditure
expenditure
percent
on health as
percent total
on health as
percent total
as percent of
on health at
on health
on health at
on health
gross
percent total
government
percent total
expenditure
private
average
PPP 45 (I$)
average
(PPP I$)
domestic
expenditure
expenditure
government
on health
expenditure
exchange
2010
exchange
2010
product
on health
2010
expenditure
2010
on health
rate (US$)
rate (US$)
2010
2010
2010
2010
2010
2010
Fiji
4.80
70.1
29.9
9.4
8.67
65.8
154.0
198.0
108.0
139.0
PNG
3.58
71.5
28.4
8.1
23.90
55.9
49.4
87.7
35.3
62.7
Samoa
6.50
87.7
12.3
23.4
13.40
63.0
204.0
283.0
179.0
248.0
Solomon
8.50
93.9
6.6
23.1
31.60
54.2
106.0
227.0
99.0
212.0
Islands
Tonga
5.10
81.5
18.5
12.9
17.40
67.8
172.0
229.0
140.0
187.0
Vanuatu
5.20
90.6
9.4
18.2
23.40
56.7
157.0
240.0
143.0
217.0
Source: WHO Global Health Observatory 2013, from http://www.who.int/gho/database/en/.
45. See footnote 2 for an explanation of PPP and international dollars.
Page 69
ANNEX 3: TEN LEADING CAUSES OF INEFFICIENCY IN HEALTH
FINANCING
Table 4.1.
Ten leading sources of inefficiency
Source of Inefficiency
Common reasons for Inefficiency
Ways to address Inefficiency
1. Medicines: underuse
Inadequate controls on supply-chain agents,
Improve prescribing guidance, information, training
of generics and higher
prescribers and dispensers; lower perceived
and practice. Require, permit or offer incentives for
than necessary prices for
efficacy/safety of generic medicines;
generic substitution. Develop active purchasing
medicines
historical prescribing patterns and inefficient
based on assessment of costs and benefits of
procurement/distribution systems; taxes and
alternatives. Ensure transparency in purchasing and
duties on medicines; excessive mark-ups.
tenders. Remove taxes and duties. Control excessive
mark-ups. Monitor and publicize medicine prices.
2. Medicines: use
Inadequate pharmaceutical regulatory
Strengthen enforcement of quality standards in the
of substandard and
structures/mechanisms; weak procurement
manufacture of medicines; carry out product testing;
counterfeit medicines
systems.
enhance procurement systems with pre-qualification
of suppliers.
3. Medicines: inappropriate
Inappropriate prescriber incentives and
Separate prescribing and dispensing functions;
and ineffective use
unethical promotion practices; consumer
regulate promotional activities; improve prescribing
demand/expectations; limited knowledge
guidance, information, training and practice;
about therapeutic effects; inadequate
disseminate public information.
regulatory frameworks.
4. Health-care products
Supplier-induced demand; fee-for-service
Reform incentive and payment structures (e.g.
and services: overuse or
payment mechanisms; fear of litigation
capitation or diagnosis-related group); develop and
supply of equipment,
(defensive medicine).
implement clinical guidelines.
investigations and
procedures
5. Health workers:
Conformity with pre-determined human
Undertake needs-based assessment and training;
inappropriate or costly
resource policies and procedures; resistance
revise remuneration policies; introduce flexible
staff mix, unmotivated
by medical profession; fixed/inflexible
contracts and/or performance-related pay;
workers
contracts; inadequate salaries; recruitment
implement task-shifting and other ways of matching
based on favouritism.
skills to needs.
6. Health-care services:
Lack of alternative care arrangements;
Provide alternative care (e.g. day care); alter
inappropriate hospital
insufficient incentives to discharge; limited
incentives to hospital providers; raise knowledge
admissions and length of
knowledge of best practice.
about efficient admission practice.
stay
7. Health-care services:
Inappropriate level of managerial resources
Incorporate inputs and output estimation into
inappropriate hospital size
for coordination and control; too many
hospital planning; match managerial capacity to size;
(low use of Infrastructure)
hospitals and inpatient beds in some
reduce excess capacity to raise occupancy rate to
areas, not enough in others. Often this
80-90% (while controlling length of stay).
reflects a lack of planning for health service
infrastructure development.
8. Health-care services:
Insufficient knowledge or application of
Improve hygiene standards in hospitals; provide
medical errors and
clinical-care standards and protocols; lack of
more continuity of care; undertake more clinical
suboptimal quality of care
guidelines; inadequate supervision.
audits; monitor hospital performance.
9. Health system leakages:
Unclear resource allocation guidance; lack
Improve regulation/governance, including strong
waste, corruption and
of transparency; poor accountability and
sanction mechanisms; assess transparency/
fraud
governance mechanisms; low salaries.
vulnerability to corruption; undertake public
spending tracking surveys; promote codes of
conduct.
10. Health Interventions:
Funding high-cost, low-effect interventions
Regular evaluation and incorporation into policy of
inefficient mix/
when low-cost, high-impact options are
evidence on the costs and impact of interventions,
inappropriate level of
unfunded. Inappropriate balance between
technologies, medicines, and policy options.
strategies
levels of care, and/or between prevention,
promotion and treatment.
Source: WHO 2010b.
70
REFERENCES
Abedian I, Merwe R, Wilkins N, & Jha P (Eds.). (1998). The Economics of Tobacco
Control: Towards an Optimum Policy Mix. Cape Town.
Anderson, I. (2013). The economic costs of noncommunicable diseases in the Pacific
Islands HNP Discussion Paper. Washington DC: World Bank.
Anderson I, Sanburg A, Aru H, Tarivonda L, Ivatts S, Latu R, & Kool J. (2013). The
costs and affordability of drug treatments for type 2 diabetes and hypertension in
Vanuatu. Pacific Health Dialog, 19(2:1).
Apovian C. (2004). Sugar-Sweetened Soft Drinks, Obesity, and Type 2 Diabetes. Journal
of American Medical Association, 292(8).
Atun, R., Jaffar, S., Nishtar, S., Knaul, F. M., Barreto, M. L., Nyirenda, M.,
Piot, P.
(2013). Improving responsiveness of health systems to non-communicable
diseases. The Lancet, 381(9867), 690-697.
Australian Government. (2011). Australia Vanuatu Partnership Report 2010. Canberra.
Beaglehole R et al. (2011). Priority Actions for the NonCommunicable Disease Crisis.
The Lancet, 377(9775).
Bhushan I, Keller S, & Schwartz B. (2002). Achieving The Twin Objectives of
Effectiveness and Efficiency: Contracting Health Services in Cambodia. In
Economics and Research Department (Ed.), ERD Policy Brief Series. Manila:
Asian Development Bank.
Choudry N. (2009). Copayment Levels and Medical Adherence. Circulation, 119.
Clements B, Coady D, & Gupta S. (2011). The Economics of Public Health Care Reform
in Advanced and Emerging Economies. In International Monetary Fund (Ed.).
Washington DC.
Creese A. (1991). User Charges For Health Care: A Review of Recent Experience.
Health Policy and Planning, 16(4).
Eckman B. (2004). Community Based Health Insurance in Low Income Countries: A
Systematic Review of the Evidence. Health Policy and Planning, 19(5).
Feeny S and McGillivray M. (2008). Do Pacific Countries Receive Too Much Foreign
Aid? Pacific Economic Bulletin, 23(2).
71
Foster, M. (2012). The Scale and Modality of Australian ODA to Vanuatu 2012 /13 to
2016/17: A Concept Note on Issues and Options. In Overseas Development
Institute (Ed.). London.
Gilson L. (1997). The Lessons of User Fees in Africa. Health Policy and Planning, 12(3).
Gottret P, & Schieber G. (2006). Health Financing Revisited: A Practitioner's Guide.
Washington DC.
Government of Vanuatu. (2006). Household Income and Expenditure Survey, . Port Vila.
Government of Vanuatu. (2009). National Population and Housing Census Analytical
Report Volume 2,. Port Vila.
Government of Vanuatu. (2010). National Policy and Strategy for Non-Communicable
Diseases 2010-2015.
Government
of
Vanuatu.
(2011a).
Ministry
of
Health.
from
http://www.governmentofvanuatu.gov.vu/index.php/government/healtlh
Government of Vanuatu. (2011b). National Health Accounts 2007.
Government of Vanuatu. (2011c). Public Expenditure Review: Health Sector.
Government of Vanuatu. (2012a). Budget 2013
Government of Vanuatu. (2012b). Health Information System Annual Report 2011.
Government of Vanuatu. (2012c). Ministry of Health Annual Report 2011. Port Vila.
Government of Vanuatu. (2012d). National Health Accounts 2007. Port Vila.
Government of Vanuatu. (2012e ). Public Expenditure Review: Health Sector 2011. Port
Vila.
Government of Vanuatu. (2012f). Summary financial report to Executive for period 1
January to 30 September 2012.
Government of Vanuatu. (2013). Ministry of Health Annual Report for 2012.
Government of Vanuatu Prime Minister's Department. (2010). Millennium Development
Goals Report 2010 for Vanuatu.
72
Heller P. (2005). Understanding Fiscal Space IMF Policy Discussion Paper. Washington
DC: International Monetary Fund.
Hsiao W, S. P., Fraker A, Hanvoravongchai P, Jowett M, Pinto D, Ramachandra S,.
(2007). Social Health Insurance for Developing Nations. In World Bank Institute
(Ed.). Washington DC.
IMF. (2011). IMF Article IV Vanuatu Country Report. Washington DC.
Jarrett, S., & Ofosu-Amaah S. (1992). Strengthening health services for MCH in Africa:
the first four years of the 'Bamako Initiative'. Health Policy and Planning, 7(2),
164-176. doi: 10.1093/heapol/7.2.164
Jha P, Joseph R, Li D, Gauvreau C, Anderson I, Moser P,
Chaloupka F. (2012).
Tobacco Taxes: A Win-Win Measure for Fiscal Space and Health. In Asian
Development Bank (Ed.). Manila.
Jha P et al. (2012). Tobacco Taxes: A Win-Win Measure for Fiscal Space and Health. In
Asian Development Bank (Ed.).
Keane C. (2011). Hospital Costing Study Port Vila Central Hospital. In AusAID Health
Resource Facility HRF (Ed.). Canberra.
Keane C. (2012). Medium Term Expenditure Framework Analysis Report. In AusAID
Health Resource Facility HRF (Ed.). Canberra.
Lagarde M, & Palmer N. (2008). The Impact of User Fees On Health Service Utilisation
in Low and Middle Income Countries: How Strong Is The Evidence. Bulletin of
the World Health Organization, 86(11).
Langenbrunner J and Somanathan A. (2011). Financing Health Care in East Asia and the
Pacific, : The World Bank,.
Loevinsohn B, & Harding A. (2005). Buying Results: Contracting for Primary Health
Care Delivery Spending Wisely:Buying Health Services For The Poor.
Washington DC: World Bank
McPake B. (1993). User Charges For Health Services in Developing Countries: A
Review of the Economic Literature. Social Science and Medicine, 36(11).
Moodie, R., Stuckler, D., Monteiro, C., Sheron, N., Neal, B., Thamarangsi, T.,
Casswell, S. (2013). Profits and pandemics: prevention of harmful effects of
tobacco, alcohol, and ultra-processed food and drink industries. The Lancet,
381(9867), 670-679.
73
Murray, C. J. L., Ezzati, M., Flaxman, A. D., Lim, S., Lozano, R., Michaud, C.,
Lopez, A. D. (2012). Global Burden of Disease 2010: a multi-investigator
collaboration for global comparative descriptive epidemiology. The Lancet,
380(9859), 2055-2058.
Normand C, & Weber A. (2009). Social Health Insurance: A Guidebook For Planning. In
VAS (Ed.). Eschborn, Germany.
Preker A, Carrin G, Dror D, Jakab B, Hsiao W, & Arhin-Tenkorang D. (2002).
Effectiveness of community health financing in meeting the cost of illness,
Bulletin of the World Health Organization., 80(2), 143-150.
Pretorius, C., & Certan, C. (2006). Vanuatu Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability (PEFA) Report. In ECORYS Nederland (Ed.). Rotterdam.
Roberts, G., & Lin S. (2012). A situational analysis of the health workforce in Vanuatu.
In UNSW (Ed.). Sydney.
Roberts M, Hsiao W, Berman P, & Reich M. (2008). Getting Health Reform Right: A
Guide To Improving Performance and Equity. New York: OUP.
Savedoff, W. (2007). What Should A Country Spend On Health Care? Health Affairs,
26(4), 962-970.
Schneider, P., & Diop, F. (2001). Synopsis of results on the impact of community-based
health insurance on financial access to health care in Rwanda. In World Bank
(Ed.), HNP Discussion Paper. Washington DC.
Southeast Asia Tobacco Control Alliance. (2010). ASEAN Tobacco Tax Report Card:
Regional Comparison and Trends. Manila.
Tandon A. (2006). Measuring Policy Effectiveness in Health and Education. In Asian
Development Bank (Ed.). Manila
Tandon, A., & Cashin, C. (2010). Assessing public expenditure on health from a fiscal
space perspective. In The World Bank (Ed.), Health Nutrition and Population
Discussion Paper Washington DC.
Tevi O. (2012). Vanuatu Resurgent.
Retrieved 8 January 2013, from
http://devpolicy.org/vanuatu-economic-update/
The Economist. (2013). The Economist Dictionary.
Retrieved 5 May 2013, from
http://www.economist.com/economics-a-to-z/a
The World Bank. (2012). The economic costs of Non-Communicable Diseases in the
Pacific Islands: a rapid stocktake of the situation in Samoa, Tonga and Vanuatu.
74
UNICEF. (2012a). Analysis and Costing of Health Related MDGs in Vanuatu.
UNICEF. (2012b). Committing to Child Survival: A Promise Renewed.
UNICEF. (2012c). Global study on child poverty and disparities: national report Vanuatu.
New York.
UNICEF and University of New South Wales. (2012). Global Studies on Child Poverty
and Disparities: National Report Vanuatu.
Wagstaff A. (2009). Social Health Insurance vs Tax-Financed Health Systems - Evidence
from OECD. In World Bank Policy Research Paper (Ed.). Washington DC.
Wang H et al. (2012). Age-specific and sex-specific mortality in 187 countries 1970-
2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. The
Lancet Vol 380.
Whimp K. (2010). Report on support to financial management in Ministry of Health. Port
Vila.
WHO. (2005). Social Health Insurance: Selected Case Studies from Asia and the Pacific.
Geneva.
WHO. (2010a). WHO Technical Manual on Tobacco Tax Administration. Geneva:
World Health Organization.
WHO. (2010b). World Health Report: The Path to Universal Coverage. Geneva: World
Health Organization.
WHO. (2011a). Global School-based Student Health Survey GSHS Samoa Fact Sheet.
WHO. (2011b). Noncommunicable Diseases Country Profiles. Geneva: World Health
Organization.
WHO. (2011c). Noncommunicable Diseases Country Profiles. Geneva.
WHO. (2012a). Achieving The Health Related Millennium Development Goals In the
Western Pacific Region. Geneva: World Health Organization.
WHO.
(2012b).
Tobacco
Fact
Sheet
No
339.
from
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs339/en/index.html
WHO. (2012c). Vanuatu STEPS Survey Fact Sheet. STEP wise approach to chronic
disease risk factor surveillance. Retrieved 16 April 2013, 2013, from
http://www.who.int/chp/steps/vanuatu/en/
75
World Bank. (2005). Spending Wisely: Buying Health Services For The Poor.
Washington DC.
World Bank. (2009). Good Practices In Health Financing: Lessons From Reforms In
Low and Middle Income Countries. Washington DC: World Bank.
World Bank. (2012). The Economic Costs of Non-Communicable Diseases in the Pacific
Islands: A Rapid Stocktake of the Situation in Samoa, Tonga and Vanuatu.
.
World Bank. (2013a). How we classify countries. Retrieved 4 January 2013., from
http://data.worldbank.org/about/country-classifications
World Bank. (2013b). World Development Indicators DataBank. Retrieved 8 January
2013 http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.XPD.PUB
76
HEALTH, NUTRITION,
AND POPULATION
HNP
HEALTH, NUTRITION, AND POPULATION
THE WORLD BANK
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT NETWORK
THE WORLD BANK
About this series.
This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Family
(HNP) of the World Bank's Human Development Network. The papers
in this series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary and
unpolished results on HNP topics to encourage discussion and debate.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper
are entirely those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any
manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated organizations or to members
of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent.
Citation and the use of material presented in this series should take
into account this provisional character. For free copies of papers in this
series please contact the individual authors whose name appears on
the paper.
Enquiries about the series and submissions should be made directly to
the Editor Martin Lutalo (mlutalo@worldbank.org) or HNP Advisory Ser-
vice (healthpop@worldbank.org, tel 202 473-2256, fax 202 522-3234).
For more information, see also www.worldbank.org/hnppublications.
THE WORLD BANK
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC USA 20433
Telephone:
202 473 1000
Facsimile:
202 477 6391
Internet: www.worldbank.org
E-mail: feedback@worldbank.org