Public Disclosure Authorized
E4271 V2
INDEPENDENT STATE OF SAMOA
AGRICULTURE AND FISHERIES CYCLONE RESPONSE PROJECT
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK
Public Disclosure Authorized
FINAL
AUGUST 22, 2013
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared by the
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries (MAF) of the Government of Samoa for the proposed
Agriculture and Fisheries Cyclone Recovery Project (AFCRP). The ESMF is the most
appropriate instrument to identify and respond to the potential social and environmental impacts
of the proposed project, instead of the normally used Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
instrument, as the details and exact location of much of project activities would only be
identified during project implementation. The ESMF provides a framework for screening these
activities to minimize adverse social and environmental impacts and to ensure appropriate
mitigating measures are incorporated in the design and during the conduct of these activities.
The Project
The AFCRP is part of the Government of Samoa's post-disaster response to Cyclone Evan that
hit the Island of Upolu last December 13, 2012. The project will provide financial assistance to
farmers in the severely and moderately affected areas for the repair/replace damaged/lost farm
assets, thereby enabling them to restore their production capacities. It will also provide financial
assistance to the Ministry of Agriculture and Fishery to repair/replace its damaged/lost facilities
and to improve its capacity to respond to similar disaster. The project will be implemented in
two years. It will have the following components:
Component 1: Cyclone Recovery for Subsistence Farmers and Fishers - Under this
Component, the project would issue vouchers to households who have been identified and
validated as subsistence farmers and/or fishers, for procuring a range of eligible farm and
fishing items including, among others, planting materials and breeding livestock, fertilizer, farm
tools, cast nets, goggles, spears, canoe repair materials and construction materials. Beneficiary
households in areas severely affected by the cyclone would receive a higher value of vouchers
than those in moderately affected areas.
Component 2: Cyclone Recovery for Commercial Farmers and Fishers. Under this
Component, commercial farmers and aquaculture operators in severely and moderately affected
areas whose farm equipment or infrastructure was lost or damaged due to the cyclone would be
eligible for recovery grants. These grants could be used to procure infrastructure repair or
reconstruction such as lost farm ditches, fish ponds and fences; and also to procure materials
and equipment including, among others, plastic and shade houses, irrigation equipment,
construction material and livestock housing.
Component 3: Restoration of MAF Facilities and Strengthening the Agricultural Sector's
Capacity for Disaster Preparedness and Response. This component would support the repair
of essential MAF facilities that were damaged during the cyclone, establish systems for the
regular collection and updating of agricultural production information, develop a standard
methodology for collection and analysis of damage and loss data for the agricultural sector and
strengthen capacities of both farmers and sector institutions in disaster preparedness and
response.
2
Component 4: Project Coordination and Management. This component will support effective
implementation and management of the project through provision of staff and technical
assistance, equipment and operating costs, and monitoring and evaluation system.
The Project would be implemented over a period of two years covering the whole country,
although direct assistance to beneficiaries would be confined to those living on Upolu in the
areas designated as severely or moderately affected in the Damage and Loss Assessment
(DaLA) undertaken as part of GOS's Post-disaster Needs Assessment (March 2013)..
Environment and Social Impacts
Given the type and scale of the planned project activities (i.e., procurement of farm inputs, tools,
equipment and materials by individual farming households; repair or restoration of small scale
farm infrastructure and MAF facilities), the direct adverse environmental and social impacts of
the project, is expected to be small which can be mitigated through the application of simple
mitigation measures. There are however some issues that need to be addressed:
The project could contribute to increased use of pesticides and environmentally destructive
items such as illegal fishing nets;
The project could be inadvertently supporting environmentally unsustainable farms due to
their locations with respect to protected areas, forests or sensitive natural habitats, bad
agricultural practices or excessive use of pesticides;
The proposed relocation of a few damaged but improperly situated ponds could encroach
into protected areas, mangroves or wetlands, or may require land acquisition or displace or
reduce access of others to livelihood sources and other services; and,
Any perceived unfairness in the selection of beneficiaries of the vouchers and grant
programs could potentially result in social conflicts in the villages.
Management Measures
In order to address the above issues, project activities will be subjected to the following
screening, review and approval and monitoring procedures:
Component 1
Component 2
Component 3
Vouchers for
Grant for Commercial
Repair/Replacement
Subsistence
Farmers/Fishers
of Damaged/Lost MAF
Farmers/Fishers
Facilities
Screening
Recipients are pre-
The Environmental and
Facilities to be
identified by a team
Social Management
rehabilitated have been
composed of the village
Officer (ESMO) or
identified (See List in
mayor and representatives
Project Officers will
Annex 3)
of women and youth
screen grant
sectors; and approved by
applications (proposals)
their village councils;
using Screening Forms
(Annexes 4 and 5). The
Eligible items for purchase
screening will
are also pre-identified and
determine
excludes chemical
requirements;
3
pesticides;
Preparation of
Upon receipt of voucher,
Satisfy requirements as
Relevant MAF units
Documentary
the recipients are each
per screening
prepare a Rehabilitation
Requirements
provided with relevant
guidelines. SACEP
Plan or Program of
MAF brochures on good
ESMO and AFCRP
Works and ESMPs if
farming/fishing practices.
Project Officers to help
required
proponent prepare
ESMPs and PEAR and
other requirements of
MNREM PUMA ;
Review and
Not required
SACEP ESMO reviews
With concerned MAF
Clearance
and provides
experts, SACEP ESMO
safeguards clearance
reviews plan/program of
for proposals to be
work against relevant
considered for funding.
MAF guidelines,
Grant proposals should
standards and
not be cleared for
regulations; and clears
funding by ESMO
proposal for
without a Development
procurement.
Consent from PUMA, if
such has been
determined to be
required under MNREM
regulations.
Implementation
Voucher recipients are free
Activities are
Works are procured by
to buy any items on the list
undertaken with
the concerned MAF
of eligible inputs and
measures according to
units.
equipment. Data on items
approved plan and
bought are recorded.
measures in the ESMP
Compliance
AFCRP Project Officers
AFCRP Project Officers
M&E Specialists
Monitoring
and SACEP ESMO will
monitors compliance of
monitors compliance of
conduct random evaluation
requirements
requirements
of the recipients.
Institutional Arrangements
A small AFCRP Project Management Unit (PMU) located within MAF would provide project
coordination and management and monitoring of the project's development impact. The PMU
includes a full time Project Manager, up to two financial management staff and two Project
Officers and additional short-term TA. The review and clearing of social and environmental
safeguards of project activities would be handled by the existing Environmental and Social
Management Officer based in the Project Coordination Group of the Samoa Agriculture
Competitiveness Enhancement Project (SACEP). The ESMO would be responsible for ensuring
the ESMF is implemented effectively, liaising with the relevant agencies such as MNREM and,
providing support to the beneficiary farmers and fishers in preparing safeguards documents with
the help of the AFCRP project officers and extension officers of MAF, through information
dissemination, training, workshops. A Safeguards Adviser will also be engaged to assist the
Project. The safeguards monitoring of compliance would be undertaken by the two AFCRP
Project Officers in coordination with the ESMO.
4
5
Aotelega
O lenei Alãfua mo le Puleaina o le Siosiomaga ma Tagata Lautele (APSTL) ua tapena ina e le
Matagaluega o Faatoaga ma Faigãfaiva 0 le Malo 0 Samoa mo le Poloketi mo le Toe Faaleleia o
Faatoaga ma Faigãfaiva sa aafia le Afa (PFFFA). O le Alãfua mo le Puleaina o le Siosiomaga ma
Tagata Lautele o se vaega ua talafeagai lelei mo le iloiloina ma le tali atu aafiaga e ono aafia ai
le siosiomaga ma tagata lautele ona o le poloketi 0 loo fuafuaina, e ese mai ai le faaaogaina o
le Suesuega o Aafiaga i le Siosiomaga, ona 0 le tele 0 faamaumauga ma nofoaga patino o
galuega o le poloketi e faatoã mafai ona mãua peã faatino le poloketi. O loo tuuina atu i le
APSTL le alafua mo le suesueina o galuega o le poloketi ina ia faaitiitia aafiaga ogaoga le
siosiomaga ma tagata lautele ma ia mautinoa le aofia o fofo talafeagai fuafuaga ma le
faatinoina o ia galuega.
O le Poloketi
O le PFFFA o se vaega o fesoasoani a le Malo o Samoa mo le faaleleia o aafiaga o le Afa o Eveni
sa aafiaga ai le Motu o Upolu i le Aso 13, Tesema 2012. Ole a tuuina atu i lenei poloketi
fesoasoani tau seleni le aufai faatoaga o loo i nofoaga sa matuã ogaoga ma feololo aafiaga mo
le toe faaleleia/suia o aseta tau faatoaga sa faaleagaina/leiloloa ma maua le avanoa e toe
faaleleia ai fua o faaeleeleaga. Ole a tuuina atu foi fesoasoani tau seleni i le Matagaluega o
Faatoaga ma Faigafaiva e toe faalelei/suia ai aseta ua faalegaina/leiloloa ma faaleleia ana
auaunaga mo le tali atu faalavelave faapea e ono toe tulai mai. O lenei poloketi ole a
faatinoina i le lua tausaga ma ole a aofia ai Vaega taua ua ta'ua lalo:
Vaega 1: Toe Faaleleia o Atina'e Tau Faatoaga ma Faigãfaiva To Aiga lalo o lenei vaega, ole
a tuuina atu e le poloketi pepa tala oloa i aiga ua maea filifilia ma faamaonia o faifaatoaga poo
faifaiva mo le tausiga o aiga e faatau ai soo se ituaiga mea faigaluega e faatagaina e aofia ai
mea faigaluega mo le totoina o laau ma galueina 0 lafumanu, faalelei eleele, mea faigaluega
tau faatoaga, upega fagota, mata fagota, mata tao fagota, mea faigaluega mo le faaleleia o vaa
alo/paopao ma mea faigaluega fau fale. O le a sili atu le telē o faamanuiaga tau seleni i aiga o
loo nonofo nofoaga sa matuã iloga ona mafatia nai lo o aiga o loo alala i nofoaga e feololo
aafiaga na 00 i ai.
Vaega 2: Toe Faaleleia o Atina'e Tau Faatoaga ma Faigãfaiva Faapisinisi I lalo o lenei Vaega,
o le au faifaatoaga ma le au fai pai'a faapisinisi i nofoaga sa matua aafia ma feololo aafiaga ma
sa ma'umau pe faaleagaina a latou mea faigaluega tau faatoaga poo isi aseta tau faatoaga ole
a faamanuiaina e ala i fesosoani tau seleni. O nei fesosoani tau seleni e mafai ona faaaogaina
mo le toe faaleleia pe toe fausia o aseta tau faatoaga sa faaleagaina e aofia ai alavai mo
faatoaga, vai mo pai'a ma pa; ma e mafai foi ona faatau ai mea faigaluega tau faatoaga e aofia
ai ufiufi pepa ma fale to laau (shade houses), mea faigaluega mo le fuiina o togalaau (irrigation
equipment), mea faufale ma fale mo lafumanu.
Vaega 3: Toe Faaleleia o Fale o le Matãgaluega ma faamalosia le tomai o le Matãgaluega To
Tapenaga ma le Tali atu i Taimi o Faalavelave Faafuasei O lenei vaega 0 lea lagolagoina ai le
6
toe faaleleia o fale/nofoaga togia/taua 0 le Matãgaluega sa faaleagaina e le afa, faamalosia le
auaunaga a le Matagaluega i le aoina ma le tuufatasia o faamaumauga tau faatoaga, faalelei le
tulaga mo le aoina ma le iloiloina 0 faamatalaga i mea faaleagaina ma ma'umau mo faatoaga
ma faamalosia tomai o le au faifaatoaga ma paaga o loo galulue ma le Matagaluega i tapenaga
ma le tali atu i taimi o faalavelave faafuasei.
Vaega 4: Pulega ma le Faagaioiina o le Poloketi O lenei vaega ole a lagolago i le faatinoina ma
le pulega lelei o le polokoti e ala i le faafaigaluegaina 0 se aufai galuega ma faufautua faapitoa,
faatauina o mea faigaluega ma faaavanoa tupe faaalu mo le faatinoina, ma faaogaina vaega e
mata'itū ma iloilo ai tulaga o galuega a le poloketi.
Ole a faatino lenei poloketi totonu o le lua tausaga, e ui o lenei fesoasoani ole a faamanuiaina
ai na o latou o loo nonofo Upolu i alalafaga ua patino o nofoaga e matuiã ma feololo aafiaga e
pei ona taua ile ripoti o Suesuega mo Mea sa Faalegaina ma Ma'umau sa faia o se vaega o
Suesuega mo Manaoga i le Maea ai ole Faalavelave Faanatura a le Malo o Samoa (Mati 2013).
Aafiaga i le Siosiomaga ma Tagata Lautele
E tusa ai o ituaiga ma le telē o galuega fuafua mo le poloketi (i.e. faatauina o mea tau faatoaga
ma mea faigaluega e aiga faifaatoaga tai tasi; toe faafou pe toe fausia o fale mo faatoaga laiti
ma fale/aseta a le Matãgaluega), e oga laiti aafiaga ogaoga i le siosiomaga ma tagata lautele e
afua mai i lenei poloketi ma e mafai ona fo'ia e ala i fofo faigofie. Peitai e iai lava matãupu e ao
ona silasila totoa i ai;
E ono faateleina le faaaoga o vailaau mo manu faalafuã ma mea faigaluega e aafia ai le
siosiomaga o l'a e pei o upega fagota e le faatagaina faale-tulafono;
E ono fesoasoani ma le leiloa le poloketi i faatoaga e le gafataulimaina faalesiosiomaga
le faatinoina ona o le latalata fanua faasao, vaomatua poo nofoaga ma'ale'ale
faanatura, ituaiga faatinoga 0 faatoaga e lē lelei poo le soona faaaogaina o vailaau mo
manu faalafuã;
O le fuafuaga mo le siitia o pa'ia ua faaleagaina ae le'o talafeagai le nofoaga e ono
aafia ai fanua faasao, togã togo ma nofoaga faataufusi, pe moomia ai foi le ave eseina
o fanua poo le tuli esea pe faaitiitia le 00 atu o isi tagata i sosia mo le soifuaga o aso
uma ma isi auaunaga; ma,
Soo se tulaga faaitu'au i le filifilia o tagata e faamanuiaina i fesosoani tupe e ono tulai
mai ai fe'ese'esea'iga i totonu o nuu.
Fofo mo le Puleaina Lelei
Ina ia foia atugaluga ua taua i luga, o galuega faatino mo lenei poloketi ole a mulimuli ta'i
iloiloga muamua, iloiloga auiliili ma le taliaina ma galuega mata'itu ua taua i lalo:
Vaega 1
Vaega 2
Vaega 3
Pepa Tala Oloa
Fesoasoani Tau Tupe
Toe faafou/suia
7
(voucher) mo le Au
mo le Au
Aseta/ Fale o le
Faifaatoga/Au Faifaiva
Faifaatoga/Au
Matãgaluega ua
mo le tausiga o Aiga
Faifaiva Faapisinisi
Faaleagaina/Ma'umau
Iloiloga Muamua
O i latou ole a
O le Ofisa mo le
O aseta tau fale mo le
faamanuiaina e iloiloina
Vaaia Lelei o le
toe faaleleia ua maea
muamua e le komiti e
Siosiomaga ma
ona filifilia. (Tagai i le
aofia ai le pule nuu ma
Tagata Lautele poo
Lisi i le Pepa faapipi 3)
sui 0 tamaitai ma
Ofisa o le Poloketi
tupulaga talavou; ma e
latou te iloiloina
faamaonia e le pulega a
talosaga mo
alii ma faipule
fesosoani tupe e
faaaoga i ai le Pepa
O mea faigaluega e
lloilo mo aafiaga
faatagaina ona faatau
(Pepa faapipi 4 ma le
ole a iloiloina ma e le
5). O lea iloiloga ole a
aofia ai vailaau;
iloa ai nisi mea e
moomia.
Saunia o
Pe a tau lima ina pepa
la faamalieina
E tapena e Vaega 0 le
Faamatalaga
tala oloa, o i latou ole a
manaoga e tusa ai ole
Matagaluega o
Moomia
faamanuiaina ole a tofu
taiala mo iloiloga. Ole
Faatoaga & Faigafaiva
ma le pepa taiala
a fesoasoani le Ofisa
fuafuaga mo le toe
talafeagai mai le
mo le Puleaina lelei o
faaleleia poo
Matagaluega o
le Siosiomaga ma
Polokalame Faagasolo
Faatoaga & Faigafaiva e
Tagata Lautele ole
o Galuega ma
faailoa atu ai le
poloketi a le SACEP
Fuafuaga mo le Pulea
faatinoga i tulaga
ma le Ofisa ole
Lelei o le Sioiomaga
lelei/taualoa o faatoaga
poloketi PFFFA i le
ma Tagata Lautele pe
ma faiga faiva
tagata talosaga e
a moomia;
saunia Fuafuaga mo
le Puleaina Lelei o le
Siosiomaga ma
Tagata ma le
Suesuega o Aafiaga i
le Siosiomaga pea
moomia;
Iloiloga auiliili ma
E le moomia
o le Ofisa mo le
E aofia ai tagata
le pasiaina
Pulea lelei ole
faigaluega tomai
Sioiomaga ma Tagata
faapitoa 0 le
Lautele o le poloketi
Matãgaluega, ole a
ole SACEP e iloiloina
latou iloiloina ma le
auiliili ma pasia vaega
Ofisa mo le Pulea lelei
mo le pulea lelei o
ole Sioiomaga ma
talosaga mo le tuuina
Tagata Lautele 0 le
8
i ai 0 meaalofa tupe
poloketi ole SACEP
fuafuaga/polokalame
0 galuega e tusa ai o
taiala, tulaga masani
ma faiga faavae
talafeagai a le
Matãgaluega; ma
pasia fuafuaga
faataatitia mo le
faatauina.
Faatinoina
E saoloto le tagata e
E faatino galuega ma
O le sailia o oloa mo le
maua pepa tala oloa e
o latou fofo e tusa ai
faatauina ole a faatino
faatau soo se ituaiga
ma fuafuaga ma fofo
lava e le vaega o le
mea faigaluega o loo i
ua pasiaina ile Alafua
Matagaluega o
totonu o le lisi 0 mea e
mo le Pulea Lelei o le
Faatoaga & Faigafaiva
faatagaina. O
Siosiomaga ma
e patino iai le galuega
faamatalaga o oloa
Tagata Lautele
faatau ole a
faamaumauina.
Asiasiga Mata'itū
O Ofisa mo le poloketi
O Ofisa mo le
O le Ofisa faapitoa mo
PFFFA ma le Ofisa mo le
poloketi PFFFA e
le Mata'itüina ma le
Pulea lelei ole
mata'itüina le usita'ia
Iloiloga ole a ia
Sioiomaga ma Tagata
o tu'utu'uga.
mata'itūina le ausia o
Lautele o le poloketi ole
tu'utu'uga.
SACEP ole a faia
suesuega tuu faasolo o
e faamanuiaina i le
poloketi.
Faatulagaina o le Ofisa o Pulega
O le Pulega mo le Poloketi PFFFA i le Matãgaluega o Faatoaga ma Faigãfaiva ole a faatinoina,
pulea ma mata'itū le poloketi i aafiaga 0 lona atina'eina. E aofia i le Pulega o le Poloketi le
Taitai Ulu o le Poloketi, Ofisa e toalua mo le puleaina o tupe ma Ofisa e toalua mo le poloketi
ma Faufautua Faapitoa e galulue faa-vaitaimi. O le iloiloga ma le pasiaina o tulaga mo le vaaia
lelei o le siosiomaga ma tagata lautele ole a gafa ma le Ofisa mo le Pulea lelei ole Sioiomaga ma
Tagata Lautele o le Poloketi ole SACEP o loo iai i le taimi nei. O galuega patino mo le Ofisa mo
le Pulea lelei ole Sioiomaga ma Tagata Lautele o le mautinoa lea o le faatinoina lelei o le Alafua
mo le Pulea lelei o le Siosiomaga ma Tagata Lautele, galulue faatasi ma pulega talafeagai e pei
ole Matagaluega o Punaoa Faanatura ma le Siosiomaga ma, fesoasoani i le aufai faatoaga ma le
aufai faiva ua faamanuiaina e tapena faamatalaga mo le vaaia lelei ole siosiomaga ma tagata
ma ole a fesoasoani foi i ai Ofisa o le Poloketi PFFFA ma le aufaigaluega a le Matagaluega e ala i
le tufaina o faamatalaga, aoaoga ma fonotaga. Ole a iai foi le faufautua faapitoa e fesoasoani i
9
le poloketi. O le mata'ituina o le usitaia o aiaiga mo le pulea lelei ole siosiomaga ma tagata ole
a faatino e Ofisa e toalua mo le Poloketi PFFFA e galulue soosoo tau'au ai ma le Ofisa mo le
Pulea lelei ole Sioiomaga ma Tagata Lautele.
10
ACRONYMNS
CEAR
Comprehensive Environmental Assessment Report
EA
Environmental Assessment
EMP
Environmental Management Plan
ESMOESMO
Environmental and Social Management Officer
ESMF
Environmental and Social Management Framework
GOS
Government of Samoa
IEC
Information, Education and Communication
IDA
International Development Association
IPM
Integrated Pest Management
IPP
Indigenous Peoples Plan
MAF
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
MNREM
Ministry of Natural Resources, Environment, and Meteorology
OP
Operational Policy
PEAR
Preliminary Environmental Assessment Report
PMU
Project Management Unit
PUMA
Planning and Urban Management Agency
SACEP
Samoa Agricultural Competitiveness Enhancement Project
AFCRP
Agriculture and Fisheries Cyclone Recovery Project
SIA
Social Impact Assessment
11
TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
2
1. Introduction
13
1.2 Project Description
13
1.3 Potential Social and Environmental Issues
15
2. Environmental and Social Safeguards Requirements
16
3. Environmental and Social Profile of the Project Area
18
4. Environmental and Social Management Measures: Procedures and Requirements
22
Component 1: Distribution of Vouchers to Subsistence Farmers and Fishers
22
Component 2: Grant to Commercial Crop or Aquaculture Farms
23
Component 3: Rehabilitation/Repair of Damaged MAF Facilities
24
5. Implementation Arrangements and Staffing
25
6. Estimated Costs
26
ANNEX 1 - Eligible Input Purchases by Voucher Type
26
ANNEX 2 - Indicative List of Activities to be funded Under Component 2
28
ANNEX 3 - List of Activities for funding under Component 3
29
ANNEX 4 - Screening Form for Rehabilitation of Farm Infrastructure Proposals
30
ANNEX 5 - Screening Form for Fish Pond Rehabilitation
33
ANNEX 6 - PUMA (Environmental Impact Assessment) Regulation 2007
37
ANNEX 7 - Environmental Project of Samoa
44
ANNEX 8 - Social Assessment
67
ANNEX 9 - Minutes of Consultations
85
ANNEX 10 - Grievance Redress Mechanism for SACEP
94
Table 1: World Bank Safeguards Policies and their Applicability to SAFCRP
16
Table 2: Component 3 activities and potential social or environmental issues
21
Table 3: Summary of procedures and requirements for each component
24
12
1. Introduction
The Government of Samoa (GoS) has requested World Bank financing for an Agriculture and
Fisheries Cyclone Recovery Project (AFCRP) to accelerate the recovery of famers and fishers
severely affected by the recent Cyclone Evans which struck Samoa in December 2012. The
project complements another World Bank funded project, the Samoa Agriculture
Competitiveness Enhancement Project (SACEP), which became effective in July 2013. SACEP
aims to support fruit and vegetable growers and livestock producers to improve their
productivity and take greater advantage of market opportunities.
This Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared for the
AFCRP to ensure that project activities will be undertaken in an environmentally and socially
sustainable manner. The objectives of this ESMF are to:
Assess the potential environmental and social issues associated with the various project
activities;
Establish clear procedures for screening, assessing and mitigating the environmental and
social impacts of project activities; and,
Specify appropriate roles and responsibilities within the implementing agency for
managing and monitoring environmental and social concerns related to project activities.
1.2 Project Description
The project aims to restore the lost production capacities of cyclone affected farmers and fishers
and to enhance preparedness of the agricultural sector to better respond to future disasters. The
project will have the following components:
Component 1: Cyclone Recovery for Subsistence Farmers and Fishers. The objective of this
component would be to restore the production capacity of cyclone affected subsistence farmers
and fishers. The component would comprise of:
a) Vouchers for subsistence farmers: Vouchers would be issued to project beneficiaries
for procuring a range of eligible farm and fishing items including, inter alia, planting
material and breeding livestock, fertilizer, farm tools and construction materials from
any registered supplier participating in the project. Beneficiary households in areas
severely affected by the cyclone would receive a higher value of vouchers than those in
moderately affected areas.
b) Vouchers for subsistence fishers: Vouchers would be issued to eligible fisher
households in the same severely and moderately affected areas for procuring a range of
agreed items, including, inter alia, cast nets, goggles, spears and canoe repair materials.
Vouchers would be issued for fishing equipment only in villages with Community Based
Fisheries Management Plans. Fishing households in villages without these management
plans would be issued with vouchers for agricultural items only, precluding use of
project funds for purchase of fishing gear.
13
Component 2: Cyclone Recovery for Commercial Farmers and Fishers. The objective of
this component would be to restore the production capacity of cyclone affected commercial
farmers and fishers. The component would comprise of:
a) Recovery grants for commercial farmers: Commercial farmers in severely and
moderated affected areas whose farm equipment or infrastructure was lost or damaged
due to the cyclone would be eligible for recovery grants. These grants could be used to
procure materials and inputs including, inter alia, plastic and shade houses, irrigation
equipment, construction material, livestock and livestock housing. This would be done
through a 70 percent grant, up to a grant ceiling of US$ 4,200 (SAT 10,000) per farmer,
following grant program guidelines developed for the project. Project support would be
limited to regaining lost capacity only, and not to expand operations.
b) Recovery grants for commercial aquaculturists: Commercial farmers involved in
aquaculture (Tilapia farming) in the cyclone affected areas who have damaged or lost
equipment or infrastructure would be eligible for support under the project. Only
enterprises fully operational prior to the cyclone would be eligible for financing through
a 70 percent grant, up to a grant ceiling of US$ 4,200 (SAT 10,000) per farmer. Project
support would be limited to regaining lost capacity only, and not to expand operations.
To be eligible for a recovery grant, ponds/tanks poorly sited from an environmental
point of view would have to be resituated on the farm.
Component 3: Restoration of MAF Facilities and Strengthening the Agricultural Sector's
Capacity for Disaster Preparedness and Response. The objective of this component would
be to support the repair of essential MAF facilities that were damaged during the cyclone,
establish systems for the regular collection and updating of agricultural production information,
develop a standard methodology for collection and analysis of damage and loss data for the
agricultural sector and strengthen capacities of both farmers and sector institutions in disaster
preparedness and response.
a) Repair of damaged MAF facilities: Facilities and equipment owned by MAF's Crop
Division (CD), Animal Production and Health Division (APHD) and Fisheries Division
(FD) that were destroyed or damaged in the cyclone would be repaired or replaced. This
would include repair of the boundary fence at Atele and Nu'u, plastic tunnels and shade
houses at the CD headquarters in Nu'u; chainsaws for fence clearance; replacing
veterinary drug supplies used in the immediate post cyclone period; replacement of lost
marker buoys that delineate fish and shellfish sanctuaries; repair of the Aquaculture
workshops and FD's research vessel; replacement of giant clams in fish reserves and of
lost fish aggregating devises.
b) Strengthening the agricultural sector's capacity for disaster preparedness and
response: The project would support Technical Assistance to strengthen the capacity of
the sector to respond more effectively to future natural disasters, through training
programs to assist farmers and fishers protect their assets when extreme events are
forecast; establish improved systems for the regular collection and updating of
agricultural production information; enhancing MAF's ability to assess damages and
14
losses following a natural disaster and target support to those most affected; develop
systems for assessing the biological and ecosystem impact of natural calamities on
fisheries and designing effective rehabilitation programs; training programs to assist to
improve disaster preparedness of farmers and fishers; and procurement of a boat trailer
to facilitate removal of boats in Apia when extreme weather events are forecast.
Component 4: Project Coordination and Management. This component will support
effective implementation and management of the project through:
a) Staff and technical assistance: engagement of incremental staff (consultants) needed to
coordinate and implement the project effectively, including a full-time Project Manager;
up to two financial management staff; two project officers; and short-term advisers in
project management, information technology, procurement, financial management and
environment and social safeguards.
b) Equipment and operating costs: This would include procurement of up to two vehicles
for the project and provision of adequate work facilities and operating expenditure
(including vehicle hire where necessary) for MAF to maximize operational
effectiveness.
c) Monitoring and evaluation: designing an MIS system for project and enhancing
MAF's M&E systems to track implementation progress and results.
1.3 Potential Social and Environmental Issues
As designed, the project would provide social benefits to the cyclone affected areas by restoring
livelihoods, income and food supply; and environmental benefits by rehabilitating silted or
scoured croplands, restoring damaged ponds dikes, irrigation ditches and farm drainage.
However, if adequate safeguards are not in place, procurement activities under the first three
components could result in or could indirectly contribute to the following:
Increased use of pesticides and environmentally destructive items such as illegal fishing
nets;
The project could be inadvertently supporting environmentally unsustainable farms due
to their locations with respect to protected areas, forests or sensitive natural habitats, bad
agricultural practices or excessive use of pesticides;
The proposed relocation of a few damaged but improperly situated ponds could encroach
into protected areas, mangroves or wetlands, or may require land acquisition or displace
or reduce access of others to livelihood sources and other services.
Any perceived unfairness in the selection of beneficiaries of the vouchers and grant
programs could potentially result in social conflicts in the villages.
Likewise, civil works and construction activities in the repair and restoration of damaged/lost
commercial farm infrastructure and MAF facilities, if not properly managed, could also cause
temporary environmental problems such as sedimentation of waterways, alteration of stream
flow, restriction of access, displacement of structures and homes, dusts and noise nuisances,
15
among others.
2. Environmental and Social Safeguards Requirements
Triggered World Bank Policies - Of the ten (10) World Bank social and environmental
policies, four were deemed triggered (Table 1). These are OP/BP4.01 (Environmental
Assessment); OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats); OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples); and OP/BP4.09
(Pest Management).
Table 1: World Bank Safeguards Policies and their Applicability to SAFCRP
World Bank Policy/Directive
Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01)
Yes
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04)
Yes
Forestry (OP4.36)
No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)
Yes
Cultural Property (OP 11.3)
No
Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10)
Yes
Involuntary Resettlement (OP4.12, BP 4.12)
No
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)
No
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)
No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, OP 7.60)
No
The OP 4.01 is triggered because of the potential negative environmental and social impacts of
the procurement and rehabilitation activities which although small scale, could be significant.
Under OP 4.01, the project is categorized as B. OP 4.09 is triggered because of the potential for
increased use of pesticides among project beneficiaries and the potential of additional farm
investment to indirectly result in increased pesticide use in the project areas. OP 4.04 is
triggered because Component 2 grants may involve relocation of a few poorly situated tilapia
ponds. The new sites for these ponds could encroach into natural habitats. OP 4.10 is triggered
as per recent policy ruling by the Bank Safeguards Secretariat which requires OP 4.10 to be
triggered in all Pacific Island Countries.
Compliance with the requirements of the World Bank Policies -This Framework fulfils the
requirement of OP 4.01. To comply with OP 4.09, the project will not fund purchase of any
chemical pesticides and all farming and fishing households who are beneficiaries of the voucher
programs as well as those who receive grants under Component 2 will be provided with MAF
pamphlets on Integrated Pest Management and the Safe handling of Pesticides. The
beneficiaries will also be encouraged to participate in the IPM trainings to be conducted by the
MAF. For OP 4.04, the project will not fund fish pond rehabilitation that would involve
relocation of the pond to new sites that encroaches or affects any critical or non-critical natural
habitats as defined under OP 4.04.
In terms of OP 4.10, the social assessment conducted under SACEP (Annex 8) provided inputs
16
that informed the design of the project particularly in the identification and selection process of
beneficiaries for Component 1 and 2. In addition, a series of free and prior informed
consultations, as required under WB OP/BP 4.10 have been conducted in villages by MAF and
the MWCD. The minutes of these consultations (Annex 9) indicate broad community
acceptance and support for the project.
Other policies such as OP 4.36 (Forestry), OP11.3 (Cultural Property) and OP4.12 (Involuntary
Resettlement) while not triggered have been considered in the screening of eligible project
activities under Component 2. Activities that would convert forest or natural habitat or those
that would result in involuntary displacement or restriction of access to livelihoods or those that
involve lands with existing boundary disputes would not be funded.
Country Environmental Regulations Requirements - The relevant country environmental
regulations are stipulated in three statutory documents. These are: (1) the Planning and Urban
Management (Environmental Impact Assessment) Regulations 2007 (2007 Regulation); (2) the
Planning and Urban Management Act 2004 (2004 Act); and (3) the Strategy for the
Development of Samoa 2012 - 2016 (SDS). The 2004 Act was established "to implement a
framework for planning the use, development, management and protection of land in Samoa in
the present and long-term interests of all Samoans and for related interests. The Act requires
all development to require a Consent (S.34) and for persons with intentions to undertake
development to apply to PUMA for a Development Consent to carry out development (S.37).
As part of the development consent application, PUMA may require the applicant to provide an
EIA. The PUMA EIA Regulations (2007) elaborates on the types of EIAs required of which
there are two (i) a Preliminary Environment Impact Assessment (PEAR) and (ii) a
Comprehensive Environmental Impact Assessment (CEAR) (S.4). The criteria for determining
which (PEAR or CEAR) is required are set out in Section 5. A PEAR may also recommend that
an EIA is necessary if it finds significant environmental impacts that need more detailed
investigations. The contents of both the PEAR and CEAR are described in Section 7. Included
in the PUMA's planning framework is the Code of Environmental Practices (COEP, 2006) that
defines methods and/or procedures to be followed by consultants, designers and contractors for
the avoidance or mitigation of adverse environmental effects that may arise out of infrastructure
development projects or maintenance work. Policies and standards for parking, noise and
pollution have also been developed. The qualifying criteria for requirement of an EIA, specified
in the guideline include adverse impacts:
a. On people, an existing activity, building or land;
b. On a place, species or habitat of environmental (including social and
cultural)importance;
c. In conjunction with natural hazard risks;
d. On or in the coastal zone;
e. On or in any waterway or aquifer;
f. Arising from the discharge of any contaminant or environmental pollutant;
g. Associated with land instability, coastal inundation, or flooding;
h. On the landscape or amenity of an area;
i. Impacts on public infrastructure;
j. On traffic or transportation; and
17
k. On any other matter for consideration stated in Section 46 of the Act.
The indicative list of activities for AFCRP (Annexes 1-3) do not appear to have any major
adverse impacts in areas as per above qualifying criteria. Activities under Component 2 may
have some adverse impacts on the above but assuming they would pass the environmental
screening, they would likely be negligible given the small scale of the undertakings (i.e. a
maximum of cost of US$6,000 (SAT 14,500)). This means that a PEAR should suffice the
government EA requirements. This would complement the ESMP requirement of the World
Bank. This however would depend on the proposed infrastructure or farm rehabilitation works.
Hence, the above criteria will be included in the screening of the EA requirements of
Component 2 activities.
3. Environmental and Social Profile of the Project Area
Environmental and Social Profile of the Project Area - The Project would be implemented
over a period of two years covering the whole country, although direct assistance to
beneficiaries would be confined to those living on Upolu (one of the two major islands that
comprise Samoa) in the areas designated as severely or moderately affected in the Damage and
Loss Assessment (DaLA) undertaken as part of GOS's Post-disaster Needs Assessment (March
2013). The Environmental Profile (Annex 7) excerpted from Environmental Assessment
conducted for SACEP and a Social Assessment (Annex 8) also conducted for SACEP have
provided inputs into the design of AFCRP.
Environmental Profile
The Samoan islands are of volcanic origin dominated by olivine basaltic rocks. The main
islands including Upolu are generally mountainous and consist of relatively few areas of flat or
undulating land suitable for agriculture or village settlements. In Upolu, the main mountain
ridge runs along the length of the island with mountains rising as high as 1,500 msal. Upolu still
has substantial forest areas with about 33,000 hectares of open forest, 17,300 hectares secondary
forests, and 1,300 primary forest, 18,300 hectares grasslands and medium forests and bush and
barren lands. There are an estimated 353 hectares of mangroves and 597 hectares of wetlands.
Settlements and agricultural lands are concentrated on the coastal plains and rolling slopes. The
existing agricultural land use pattern is either based on subsistence farming or plantation
cropping and is generally confined to the lowland and foothill areas up to about 230 masl. In
areas of gentle slope and higher population pressure such as North-west Upolu, agricultural
development extends to elevations of as high as 300 masl. Most of the high intensity agricultural
production lands are within the 75 masl. The major crops consist of coconut, cocoa and bananas.
Coconut plantations dominate the croplands with total area of 26,000 hectares.
Samoa has a high biodiversity with more than 2,500 species of insect, 770 species of native
plants, 64 native land snails, 31 breeding birds, 14 reptiles and 3 native mammals. Marine
biodiversity is also high with about 890 coral reef fish, over 200 corals and several turtles,
whales and dolphins. About 30% of these species are endemic to Samoa. This biodiversity
18
is threatened by habitat destruction due to agricultural development and housing, over-
harvesting of resources and the impact of invasive species of pests and weeds. Some of these
species such as are already in the endangered list, including the Samoa national bird, the
Tooth-billed Pigeon (Didinculus strigirostris) and the Samoan flying fox. Major
conservation sites have been established by the government. There are about 16 protected areas
covering a total about 35,000 hectares and natural reserves in Samoa including three Marine
Protected Areas.
Social Assessment
The Island of Upolu has a total population of 187,820 (26,205 households) with males
constituting 52% of the population. About 60 percent of the population are engaged in
agriculture: 30 percent are subsistence households producing only for home consumption; 26
percent produce primarily for home consumption but with some limited opportunistic selling in
the local market; and 3 percent produce primarily for sale. Farm size averages six acres, focused
predominantly on the subsistence staples of taro, banana, ta'amu, breadfruit, and coconut and a
variety of fruits and vegetables. There is only a handful of bigger commercial farmers selling
directly to either supermarkets, restaurants and institutions, but even these operations are of
limited scale. Livestock farming is also largely subsistent production based on cattle, poultry,
pigs, and sheep, with a few larger semi-commercial units also producing these livestock. In the
fishery sector, about one-quarter of rural households are engaged in fishing, with most of the
catch used for home consumption. Only a small number of households engage in off-shore
commercial fishing (tuna exported frozen to American Samoa). Coastal and lagoon fishery
consists primarily of small dugout and fibreglass canoes and boats fishing in the lagoon area,
and larger aluminium boats fishing on the outer edges of the reefs. The vast majority of the
lagoon fishing is subsistence carried out by fishers gleaning the reefs and/or by using spear
fishing gear. Aquaculture in Samoa is still very rudimentary with a small number of tilapia
farmers.
Family and village structure: The family, 'iaga, and the village, nu'u, are key social units in
Samoan society. The Samoan family refers to an extended family which may include three or
four generations living in close proximity. It is the primary unit through which the Samoan way
of life, fa'a Samoa, operates. A village is made up of chiefs, who govern the village, and
untitled men and women. Untitled members in a village are in one of four groups; the wives of
matai (faletua), school aged children (tamaiti), untitled men (collectively aumaga), and women
(aualuma - which also refers to the women's committee). The latter two groups are the workers
in the village. There are 362 villages in Samoa and each village takes great pride in maintaining
its identity and distinctive history. Loyalty to one's village and family are 'an almost sacred
obligation'¹ Groups of villages form districts, itu malo, connoting an alliance.
Each family has at least one leader, matai, as its head which is usually a male and may also be a
female. A matai is appointed through inheritance and family. The matai works for the family
to provide maximum benefits for all the members of the family. Matai command respect and
1
Samoa Pacific Pride, by Graeme Lay, Tony Murrow & Malama Meleisea, 2000 Pasifika Press Ltd
19
are addressed by their titles of Afioga, Susuga and Tofa depending on their type and hierarchy.
In 2006 only 9 percent of the total population reported to be Matai in their households (80
percent were male and 20 percent female)². The matai is responsible for directing use of family
land and other assets belonging to the family. Matai are responsible for enforcement of village
law and punishment of family members who have violated social codes. Only Matai can run for
parliament. Each matai represents the family at village council, fono, meetings. The council of
matai governs its village and makes decisions on all village matters beyond those made by each
family. To make changes in a village, the most powerful matai needs to win the full support of
the other matai of that village. In the village the chiefs make, interpret and implement the law.
If anything needs to be done in the community it is done through the chiefs. It is through the
chiefs a formal relationship can be established. The village mayor, pulenu'u, a matai and on the
village council, is the point of contact to link the project with villages. Matais are registered at
the Land Titles Court. Bestowing so many matai titles is a current concern, in part because it
makes decision making about development on customary land difficult. Some matai have
stopped development and disagreement has sometimes resulted in a lengthy court case.
Each village has a women's committee which meets monthly and at other times as required.
The women's committee is very active in each village. Each committee has a representative
and representatives meet monthly with the Women's Division (WD) of the Ministry of Women
Community and Social Development (MWCSD). Each representative is paid by government
but selected by the village. The representative acts as a liaison between the village and
government. There are 105 representatives in Upolu and 86 in Savaii. Meetings are an
opportunity for participants to share information on a wide range of topics.
Land ownership and tenure: In Samoa, approximately 86 percent of the land is customary land
and owned by the family over which the matai has authority. In 2006, 65 percent of households
were living on customary land and 25 percent lived on freehold land. The rest lived on other
types of land tenure³. The four regions of Samoa have markedly different percentages of people
living on customary land. Savaii has 93 percent, Rest of Upolu (ROU) 90 percent, North West
Upolu (NWU) 54 percent and Apia Urban Area (AUA) 24 percent. No households in Savaii
and ROU lived on leased or Government land. Approximately 91 percent of crop cultivation
takes place on customary land with a small percentage on freehold land and a smaller
percentage on leased land⁴.
Gender roles: While there are traditional male/female roles in the production cycle, the
agricultural workload is usually shared. The exception is fishing, where women and older men
glean the lagoons and inner reefs while younger men fish the outer lagoons, reefs, and sea. The
men do the more physically challenging work including scaling trees for coconuts, cassava
planting and harvesting, and slaughtering cattle. The women tend the smaller animals, do
gardening, serve food and provide for guests, and support health and education initiatives as
well as looking after the family. When there are village events such as planting of crops, it is
2
Report of the Population and Housing Census 2006
3
Leased land 4 percent, government land 1 percent, church land 4 percent, employer's land 1 percent and not
stated .1 percent (Report of the Population and Housing Census 2006)
4
Refer to Dr Hanemann's report for details.
20
the untitled men and women who do the work while the matai supervise and administer. Great
importance is placed on the group and its dignity and achievement rather than the individual.
This value is deeply rooted in the Samoan way of life.
Social and Environmental Impacts of Project Activities - The social and environmental
impacts of project activities are unlikely to be significant especially for Component 1. Minor
and localized impacts may be felt in some of the Component 2 and Component 3 activities but
these would be easily mitigated or avoided through proper engineering measures. Except for the
rehabilitation of some fish ponds that would also need to be relocated, all activities will not
result in new environmental footprints and hence would not have incremental land use impacts
and land acquisition issues. None of the project activities would require a full EIA. A simple
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) may be required for some Component 2
and Component 3 activities. Project activities would be concentrated on existing footprints,
except if previous sites are assessed to be in a natural hazard zones or environmentally sensitive
environment in which case relocation to a more environmentally and socially appropriate site
would be necessary.
Component 1 - The purchase of inputs and materials under Component 1 (Voucher Program)
which are estimated to be about WST1600 (US$800) each for severely affected household and
WST1000 (US$500) for each of the moderately affected households are unlikely to have any
direct adverse environmental or social impacts. There is however a small risk that project
funding could inadvertently support environmentally unsustainable farming practices, which can
mitigated by an Information, Education and Communication (IEC) on good farming practices.
Component 2 - Based on the indicative list of activities to be funded under Component 2
(Annex 2), only a few would have direct environmental or social impacts and any direct
environmental impacts would likely be negligible given the maximum grant per farms of only
SAT10,000 (US$ 4,200) and SAT 6,700 (US$2,814) (each for severely and moderately affected
households, respectively. Adverse social impacts if there would be any would be limited to the
immediate vicinity and involve one to a few households. The MAF Fisheries Division has
identified about eight (8) fish ponds that have been destroyed by the cyclone. Some of these fish
ponds however would not only need to be rehabilitated but also would need to be relocated. The
original location of these ponds were poorly sited (i.e. some are too close to the river) as they
were established by their owners without prior consultation of the MAF.
Component 3 - Component 3 activities are also small scale and would not have any new
footprints. There are however some potential but minor issues which would need to be assessed
and if significant, to be satisfactorily addressed prior to implementation (Table 2). For example,
the fencing of lands may restrict/reduce access by local residents to roads or homes or farms.
For activities involving civil works, usual construction impacts should be mitigated. A simple
ESMP addressing these issues should be prepared, except for the repair of vessels.
Table 2: Component 3 activities and potential social or environmental issues
Activities
Issues
21
Repair of Nu'u fence, plastic tunnels and shade
Potential restriction of access of nearby
cloth houses;
community residents
Procurement of replacement chainsaws and
Use of chainsaws to cut forest trees
veterinary drug supplies;
Replacement of lost marker buoys for fish
Restriction of access to fishing grounds
sanctuaries
Building repairs for Fisheries aquaculture Work
Construction impacts (noise and dusts nuisance,
Shop
waste disposal)
Procurement and relocating three destroyed Fish
Location issues; Restriction of access of
Aggregating Devices (FADs);
traditional fishers to their fishing grounds
Giant clam replacement and regeneration
Introduction of foreign species
Repair of Fisheries Division research vessel;
None
Procurement of boat trailer.
None
4. Environmental and Social Management Measures: Procedures and Requirements
The measures below are applied in order to minimize environmental and social risks as well as
identify and mitigate impacts of individual activities under each Component. These measures
include procedures and requirements that are in compliance with the applicable World Bank
policies and government environmental legislation and regulation in Samoa (PUMA Act 2004
and PUMA (EIA) Regulation 2007). The specific management measures for each component
are discussed below and are summarized in Table 3:
Component 1: Distribution of Vouchers to Subsistence Farmers and Fishers
Screening - Only those listed in the list of beneficiaries are entitled to receive the vouchers
and vouchers can only be used to purchase items found in the list of eligible items.
Beneficiaries of the voucher program will be pre-identified at their respective villages by a
team composed of representatives from the women, youth and the village mayor based on the
criteria provided by MAF. The list would be approved by the village council before they are
submitted to the AFCRP for consolidation and initial validation. After initial validation, the list
will be sent again to the villages to be posted in the central or conspicuous places such as the
village churches for final validation by the residents for a particular period. The lists will also
be published in a national newspaper. During this period MAF-, will entertain any
clarifications, complaints or requests for amendments to lists of beneficiaries. Telephone
hotlines in MAF will be made available during this period.
The items eligible for purchase using the vouchers have also been pre-identified (Annex 1) and
have been pre-screened to include only prescribed items such as fishing nets with mesh size of
not less than 1.2 inches. Hazardous and environmentally risky items such as chemical
pesticides are ineligible for purchase for voucher recipients.
There will be no need for environmental or social screening of individual recipient farms.
Assessment and Safeguards Documentary Requirements - Voucher recipients would not be
22
required to undertake any assessment or prepare any ESMPs. Instead, voucher recipients will
be provided a package containing the relevant MAF Pamphlets containing guidelines for
sustainable and good farming practices. When beneficiaries sign up for the voucher program,
they will be asked to provide some details on what they intend to purchase with the vouchers.
Based on this information, the project will prepare some simple pamphlets (in Samoan) to
provide guidance on good practices related to environmental and social aspects of crop
production/ safe handling of pesticides/ small scale livestock production/ inshore fisheries.
These will be given to all voucher recipients. The following pamphlets are currently available
at the MAF:
1. Proper and Safe Handling of Pesticides
2. Integrated Pest Management
3. Watershed Management and Soil Conservation
4. Fisheries Guidelines and Standards
Implementation - Voucher recipients will purchase the items they need from any of the
Project-nominated suppliers. The transaction data are automatically captured by the electronic
system which will be established with the suppliers and a data service provider; Otherwise
beneficiaries should keep a simple record of what they purchased with their vouchers, which
will be supplied to the MAF. In terms of technical support on the guidelines, there will be a
telephone hotline in the MAF which the farmers can call if they have questions on how to do
things or need guidance. MAF will offer some training on safe handling of pesticides and IPM.
These would be widely announced and farmers could attend on a voluntary basis. As already
agreed with MAF, vouchers cannot be used to purchase pesticides/herbicides.
Compliance Monitoring - The SACEP ESMO would randomly select and visit beneficiary
households to monitor and validate safeguards compliance. Safeguards compliance however
should be included in the M&E system. The AFRP Project Officers in collaboration with the
SACEP ESMO will develop a safeguards compliance monitoring protocol for voucher
recipients.
Component 2: Grant to Commercial Crop or Aquaculture Farms
Screening - To qualify for this program, a farm must be properly situated with respect to
protected areas, forests and natural water bodies. Environmental and social screening forms
shall be completed (Annexes 4 or 5) which combine government regulations and World Bank
policy regulations. The screening will be done by the SACEP ESMO who will also be
handling the social safeguards requirements for AFCRP. These screening forms will be further
refined by ESMO prior to implementation.
Documentary Requirements - The screening will determine further documentary requirements
under PUMA regulations i.e. whether an EIA or PEAR would be required. For the World
Bank requirement, a simple ESMP in matrix format should be prepared based on the
environmental conditions of the site and the type of rehabilitation works to be done. The
SACEP ESMO will review and approve/decline all grant proposals packages including the
ESMPs based on environmental and social concerns. If a Consent from PUMA is required the
23
ESMO should assist the grantee obtain such Consent.
Review and Clearance - All proposals shall be reviewed and cleared by the SACEP ESMO.
Among the items to be reviewed are: (1) the fulfilment of PUMA requirements, if any; (2) the
proposals compliance with relevant MAF guidelines and standards; and, (3) compliance with
World Bank safeguards policy requirements including a satisfactory ESMP.
Compliance Monitoring - The AFCRP Project Officers in collaboration with the SACEP
ESMO will monitor all grant recipients farms in terms of compliance with ESMPs and other
issues. A safeguards compliance monitoring protocol will be developed by the Project Officers
and SACEP ESMO.
Component 3: Rehabilitation/Repair of Damaged MAF Facilities
Screening - These eligible activities have already been pre-identified by MAF. Based on the
above there will be no need for EMP for these activities.
Documentary Requirements - For activities involving civil works, relevant MAF units will
prepare a Rehabilitation Plan or Program of Works according to its own guidelines and
standards. The MAF unit will also be responsible for preparing an EMSP which addresses the
relevant issues. For activities not involving civil works no safeguards documentation is
required.
Review and Clearance - The ESMO in consultation with the relevant MAF units reviews the
final rehabilitation plan or Program of Works, the ESMP and other safeguards documents,
against relevant MAF regulations, standards and guidelines and compliance with MNREM -
PUMA requirements, if any.
Implementation - The rehabilitation works will be procured by the concerned MAF unit. The
concerned unit will also be responsible for the implementation of measures identified in the
ESMP.
Compliance Monitoring -The concerned MAF unit will provide two (2) Safeguards
Compliance Reports to the Project Management Unit, one during construction and another
after completion of the rehabilitation works. The reports will be reviewed by the ESMO who
will conduct site inspections as necessary to validate reports.
Table 3: Summary of procedures and requirements for each component
Component 1
Component 2
Component 3
Vouchers for
Grant for Commercial
Repair/Replacement
Subsistence
Farmers/Fishers
of Damaged/Lost MAF
Farmers/Fishers
Facilities
Screening
Recipients are pre-
The Environmental and
Facilities to be
identified by a team
Social Management
rehabilitated have been
composed of the village
Officer (ESMO) or
identified (See List in
24
mayor and representatives
Project Officers will
Annex 3)
of women and youth
screen grant
sectors; and approved by
applications (proposals)
their village councils;
using Screening Forms
(Annexes 4 and 5). The
Eligible items for purchase
screening will
are also pre-identified and
determine
excludes chemical
requirements;
pesticides;
Preparation of
Upon receipt of voucher,
Satisfy requirements as
Relevant MAF units
Documentary
the recipients are each
per screening
prepare a Rehabilitation
Requirements
provided with relevant
guidelines. SACEP
Plan or Program of
MAF brochures on good
ESMO and AFCRP
Works and ESMPs if
farming/fishing practices.
Project Officers to help
required
proponent prepare
ESMPs and PEAR and
other MNREM/PUMA
requirements if any;
Review and
Not required
SACEP ESMO reviews
With concerned MAF
Clearance
and provides
experts, SACEP ESMO
safeguards clearance
reviews plan/program of
for proposals to be
work against relevant
considered for funding.
MAF guidelines,
Grant proposals should
standards and
not be cleared for
regulations; and clears
funding by ESMO
proposal for
without a Development
procurement.
Consent from PUMA, if
such has been
determined to be
required under MNREM
regulations.
Implementation
Voucher recipients are free
Activities are
Works are procured by
to buy any items on the list
undertaken with
the concerned MAF
of eligible inputs and
measures according to
units.
equipment. Data on items
approved plan and
bought are recorded.
measures in the ESMP
Compliance
AFCRP Project Officers
AFCRP Project Officers
M&E Specialists
Monitoring
and SACEP ESMO will
monitors compliance of
monitors compliance of
conduct random evaluation
requirements
requirements
of the recipients.
Grievance Redress Mechanism - A grievance redress mechanism has been established and is
presented in Annex 10.
5. Implementation Arrangements and Staffing
A small AFCRP Project Management Unit (PMU) located within MAF would provide project
coordination and management and monitoring of development impact. The PMU includes a full
time Project Manager two financial management staff and three project officers and will be
25
supported by short-term TA. The review and clearing of social and environmental safeguards of
project activities would be handled by the existing Environmental and Social Management
Officer (ESMO) of SACEP to be supported by PMU project officers and MAF Extension
Officers assigned in project area. The ESMO and the Extension Officers are already familiar
with World Bank Safeguards requirements and have already undergone training on the
screening and safeguards preparation process under SACEP. The Project Officers once hired
will also receive training from the ESMO and Safeguards Advisor. The affected area is also
covered by SACEP and early rehabilitation of these areas would enhance success of its
program. This additional assignment for SACEP's ESMO and Extension Officers is not
expected to significantly impact on their workload as detailed screening will only need to be
done for component 2 and 3 activities. The ESMO would be responsible for ensuring the
ESMF is implemented effectively, liaising with the relevant agencies such as MNREM and,
providing support to the grantee farmers in preparing safeguards documents with the help of the
extension officers of MAF, through information dissemination, training, workshops. A
Safeguards Adviser will also be engaged to assist the Project. The safeguards monitoring of
compliance would be undertaken by the Project Officers in coordination with the ESMO.
The main agency responsible for environmental protection in Samoa is the Ministry of Natural
Resources and Environment and Meteorology (MNREM) under which PUMA is a Division.
This Ministry administers the PUM Act 2004 and 2007 Regulation which prescribe the
Development Consent process as the means of regulating and screening development proposals
for their potential environmental and social impacts. PUMA consults closely with other
government agencies in this review process, including MAF for proposals related to agriculture
and fisheries.
6.
Estimated Costs
The estimated cost of ESMF implementation for AFCRP over the two years of project
implementation is estimated at US$300,000, for salaries, training and monitoring. US$ 150,000
would be from AFCRP and US$200,000 is GoS through salaries of MAF personnel, PUMA
costs and support from the SACEP ESMO.
ANNEX 1 - Eligible Input Purchases by Voucher Type
Subsistence Fishing Households
Subsistence Farming Households
Positive List (Allowed)
Positive List (Allowed)
1. Three-prong Hand Spear
1. Fertilizer (Organic or Inorganic)
2. Diver Fins for adult
2. Vegetable, pasture and fodder seed
3. Diver mask professional type
3. Seedling and planting materials
4. Snorkel
4. Fencing wire and posts
5. Cast net (Throw net) Spanish type 1 inch
5. Nails
stretched mesh X 10 ft long X Polyamide
6. Livestock feed
monofilament 0,28mm diameter.
7. Construction timber
6. Eight (8) to ten (10) ft Rod and Reel
8. Materials for Animal shelter repair.
26
complete with monofilament line
9. Bow saws and axes
7. Twenty (20) fishing lures (Siripiri Galala)
10. Knapsack sprayers (for foliage
8. Insulated cool box for marine use, made
fertilizers)
with UV inhibitors between 40 and 50 liters
11. Irrigation equipment, water
capacity with strong hands and drain plug.
harvesting/storage
9. Paint/Timber/nails/rope for canoe repair
12. Crop shelter (e.g. poly-tunnels,
shade cloth, etc)
13. Farm implements (e.g. hoes,
Negative List (Not allowed)
shovels, rakes, wheelbarrows, hand
sprayers, secateurs, etc)
1. Fishing nets with mesh size of less than 1.2
14. Basic carpentry tools for repair work
inches
(eg hammers, saws, etc)
2. Gillnets
15. Rural water tanks
3. Underwater torch lights
16. Breeding livestock (pigs and poultry
only)
17. Organic or natural
Subsistence fishing households may also
pesticides/herbicides
Negative List (Not allowed)
purchase any items on the positive list for
subsistence farming households.
1. Chemical Pesticides/Herbicides
27
ANNEX 2 - Indicative List of Activities to be funded Under Component 2
Grants to Commercial Famers and Aquaculture Operators
Commercial Farmers
1. Procurement of materials and inputs such as:
Plastic and shade/greenhouses;
Irrigation equipment;
Construction material; and
Livestock;
2. Repair/rehabilitation of farm buildings and other infrastructures.
Aquaculture Operators
1. Replacement of lost equipment and facilities
2. Pond rehabilitation /relocation - MAF has identified 8 Aquaculture Ponds that have been
destroyed. Some of these ponds are poorly situated because they were installed without prior
consultation with the MAF and would need to be also relocated.
28
ANNEX 3 - List of Activities for funding under Component 3
Repair/Replacement of Damaged/Lost MAF Facilities
1. Repair of Nu'u and Atele fence, plastic tunnels and shade cloth houses;
2. Rehabilitation of fruit farm
3. Procurement of replacement chainsaws and veterinary drug supplies;
4. Replacement of lost marker buoys;
5. Building repairs for Fisheries aquaculture workshop;
6. Procurement and relocating three destroyed Fish Aggregating Devices (FADs);
7. Repair of Fisheries Division research vessel;
8. Procurement of boat trailer.
29
ANNEX 4 - Screening Form for Rehabilitation of Farm Infrastructure Proposals
[Note: The screening shall be conducted by the Extension/Project Officer. In doing the
screening, the Extension/Project Officer may consult or ask guidance from the ESMO as
necessary. This form must be included in the Farm Rehabilitation proposal package (i.e. the
package containing the program of work or feasibility study if any, plans, supporting
documents, and associated safeguard documents such as EA, EMP, etc.) and must be constantly
updated/ replaced by newly filled form to reflect newly complied requirements, if any. The
entire proposal package and this form shall not be submitted for Safeguard Review until all the
requirements identified through the screening questions above have been satisfactorily complied
with, except when there are issues that are beyond the capability of the Extension/Project
Officer to resolve.]
Name of Grant Applicant:
Type of Infrastructure:
Estimated Rehabilitation Cost:
Screening Question
N/Y
Requirement/Instr
Screener's Remarks/
uction
Further Instructions
1. Would the proposed farm infrastructure
If the answer of
rehabilitation:
either of the items is
Encroach on any protected area of
YES the proposal is
natural habitat or a natural forest?
NOT ELIGIBLE for
Caused involuntary land acquisition,
a funding.
or displacement of homes?
Adversely affect or alter structures
or areas of great cultural or
historical significance?
2. Is the farm properly situated in
If NO, the proposal
compliance with MNREM regulations (Use
is NOT ELIGIBLE
relevant MNREM/PUMA regulations).
for funding until all
[Note the ESMO should coordinate with
requirements are
PUMA on their requirements.]
met
3. Would the rehabilitation reduce people's
Design must
access to pasture, water, public services or
provide access
other resources that they depend on?
routes/corridors. If
not possible, a new
site should be
considered and the
proposal shall go
through the entire
screening process
again.
4. Is there a high probability of
If YES, the
30
encountering cultural or scientific artefacts
Applicant is
in the construction site?
required to adopt
the "Chance Find"
procedure under
SACEP
5. Involve substantial demolition of existing
If YES, the
facilities?
Applicant must
submit a Demolition
Plan
6. Involve excavation, quarrying,
If YES, the
substantial loss of vegetation, and/or
Applicant with the
generate excessive dust, vibration, noise and
help of the
wastes during construction and during
Extension Officer
operational phase?
must prepare an
EMP
7. Release hazardous substances,
If YES, an
contaminated waste water and gases during
Environmental
site preparation or demolition or during
Assessment should
operation?
be undertaken. The
EA should include
an EMP.
8. Lead to creation of open pits?
If YES, the program
of work of the
construction should
include filling and
grading of the open
pit area.
9. Lead to construction wastes?
If YES, a waste
minimization and
disposal
strategy/plan must
be indicated in the
EMP
10. Lead to loss of vegetation?
If YES, a vegetation
loss minimization
strategy/measure
shall be indicated in
the EMP.
11. Does the EMP require the provision of
If NO, revise EMP
appropriate personal protective equipment
to include provision
(PPE) to workers by contractors?
of PPE
12. If quarrying is needed, has an
If NO, proposal is
arrangement on the quarry site been made
not accepted for
and appropriate mitigating measures
until quarry
pertaining to the quarrying activities been
arrangement has
31
included in the EMP?
been made and
mitigating measures
included in the
EMP.
13. If substantial solid waste is generated,
If NO, proposal is
has a landfill/disposal site arrangement been
not accepted until
made?
the applicant is able
to show evidence
that disposal site
arrangements have
been made.
14. Is the recipient farm currently and
If YES, the farmer
regularly using significant amounts of
should be slated for
chemical pesticides or herbicides?
training on
Integrated Pest
Management by
MAF.
Screening Result Summary (check items that apply based on the above screening):
Proposal is rejected and is returned to the applicant (please state reason):
Proposal needs revision (please specify revision needed):
Proposal needs additional requirements (please enumerate):
Proposal is being referred to ESMO for further advice on (please describe the issue):
Proposal passed the screening and is recommended for ESMO Review and Approval
Name of Extension/Project Officer:
Signature:
Date:
32
ANNEX 5 - Screening Form for Fish Pond Rehabilitation
[Note: The screening shall be conducted by the Extension/Project Officer preferably from the Fishery
Division. In doing the screening, the Extension/Project Officer may consult or ask guidance from the
ESMO as necessary. This form must be included in the Pond Rehabilitation proposal package (i.e. the
package containing the program of work or feasibility study, plans, supporting documents, and
associated safeguard documents such as EA, EMP, etc.) and must be constantly updated/ replaced by
newly filled form to reflect newly complied requirements, if any. The entire proposal package and this
form shall not be submitted for Safeguard Review until all the requirements identified through the
screening questions above have been satisfactorily complied with, except when there are issues that are
beyond the capability of the Extension/Project Officer to resolve.]
Name of Applicant:
Size of Pond (hectares):
Estimated Cost of Proposed Rehabilitation:
Sample checklist questions
Y/N
Requirements/Instruc
Screener's
tion
Remarks
1.Is the current pond location not consistent
If YES, a new location
with MAF's criteria? (Refer to relevant MAF
must be identified and
Fishery Division regulation).
the proposal revised
accordingly.
2. Would the proposed new Pond location:
If the answer to at least
Encroach on a protected area, natural
one of the question
habitat, forest or wetlands?
items is YES, the
Alter cultural heritage sites or
proposal is NOT
structures?
ELIGIBLE for funding
Caused involuntary land acquisition
or displacement of dwellings?
Within a disputed lands?
3. Are there nearby stream or lake?
If YES, Go to 4: If NO
Go to 5
4. Are the fish species to be raised already in
If YES, proceed to 6. If
the stream or lake?
NO, the proposal is
NOT ELIGIBLE for
funding
5. Are there critically threatened species
If YES, the proposal is
(based on IUCN RedList and MNRE data)
NOT ELIGIBLE for
that could be affected?
funding
6. Is the proposed location in a flood hazard
If YES, the proposal is
zone?
NOT ELIGIBLE for
33
funding
7. Would the project reduce people's access
If YES, reviseproposal
to the farms, water, public services or other
to provide access
resources that they depend on?
routes/corridors. If not
possible, proposal is
NOT eligible for
funding.
8. Is there a high probability of encountering
If YES, applicant must
cultural or historical artifacts during the pond
adopt the Chance Find
construction?
procedure for SACEP
9. Would the rehabilitation works involve
If YES, an EMP must
substantial excavation and earthmoving,
be prepared, addressing
generation of construction waste/spoils, dust,
impacts of construction
noise and other nuisance?
10. Would the scale of operation of the pond
If YES, an EMP must
affect local air quality of residents and water
be prepared with
quality of receiving water channels?
measures to address
these impacts.
11. Does the pond design include provisions
If NO, the proposal
that ensure overflows are discharged into a
needs to be revised to
soak pit and discharged pipes have fine mesh
include such design
to prevent fingerlings from being
fixtures.
accidentally released into the environment?
12. Has the pond owner/operator undergone
If NO, MAF should
training on proper pond management and the
first undergo training
environmental risk of tilapia farming?
and secure certificate
of training completion
from the MAF Fishery
Division.
34
Screening Result Summary (check items that apply based on the above screening):
Proposal is rejected and is returned to the applicant (please state reason):
Proposal needs revision (please specify revision needed):
Proposal needs additional requirements (please enumerate):
Proposal is being referred to ESMO for further advice on (please describe the issue):
Proposal passed the screening and is recommended for ESMO Review and Approval
Name of Extension/Project Officer:
Signature:
Date:
35
36
ANNEX 6 - PUMA (Environmental Impact Assessment) Regulation 2007
I LE ATUA SAMOA
Planning and Urban Management (Environmental Impact Assessment) Regulations 2007
Arrangement of provisions
1. Short title and commencement
2. Interpretation
3. When an EIA is required
4. Forms of EIA
5. Qualifying Criteria for an EIA
6. Content of Preliminary Environmental Assessment Report
7. Content of Comprehensive EIA
8. Baseline and Compliance Monitoring Schedule
9. Review of PEAR and comprehensive EIA
10. External Review might be undertaken
11. Public Consultation
Schedule
Content of an EIA
Pursuant to section 105 of the Planning and Urban Management Act 2004, I, TUI ATUA
TUPUA TAMASESE EFI, Head of State of the Independent State of Samoa, acting by and
with the advice of Cabinet, MAKE the following Regulations.
DATED at Apia this
day of
2007.
(Tui Atua Tupua Tamasese
Efi) HEAD OF STATE
REGULATIONS
37
1. Title and Commencement
1. These Regulations might be cited as the Planning and Urban Management (Environmental
Impact Assessment) Regulations 2007.
2. These Regulations commence on the day they are made.
2. Interpretation
In these Regulations, unless the contrary intention appears:
"EIA" means an Environmental Impact Assessment, required for public and private
development proposals as set out in these Regulations, and includes a PEAR;
"PEAR" means the form of EIA referred to in subregulation 4(2) as a Preliminary
Environmental
Assessment Report, and applied in accordance with these Regulations;
"Proponent" means the person proposing and assuming responsibility for any development
proposal;
"The Act" means the Planning and Urban Management Act 2004.
3. When an EIA is required
1. If, as part of any development consent application made pursuant to section 37 of the Act,
an EIA is required by the Agency pursuant to section 42 of the Act, the EIA must be
prepared and provided in the manner prescribed under these regulations, unless the Agency
directs otherwise in writing.
2. In deciding whether to require an EIA, the Agency would take into consideration all the
information and documentation provided with the application.
4. Forms of EIA
1. A Preliminary Environmental Assessment Report (PEAR) and a Comprehensive
Environmental Assessment Report (CEAR) are the two forms of EIA.
2. A Preliminary Environmental Assessment Report might be required by the Agency for any
development application to which any of the qualifying criteria specified in these
Regulations apply, but which the Agency considers is not likely to have a significant
adverse impact on the environment.
3. A Comprehensive EIA might be required by the Agency for any development application to
which any of the qualifying criteria specified in these Regulations apply, and which the
Agency considers is likely to have a significant adverse impact on the environment.
38
4. As a consequence of learning more about any particular development the Agency might,
within 1 month of issuing any such requirement, alter its requirement, including changing its
requirement from a PEAR to a CEAR or vice-versa.
5. A requirement or alteration under this Part shall be notified in writing to the proponent.
5. Qualifying Criteria for an EIA
An EIA might be required where the Agency considers that the development application and its
associated activities could give rise to any of the following:
a. adverse impacts on people, an existing activity, building or land;
b. adverse impacts on a place, species or habitat of environmental (including social and
cultural) importance;
c. adverse impacts in conjunction with natural hazard risks; (d) adverse impacts on or in the
coastal zone;
d. adverse impacts on or in any waterway or aquifer;
e. adverse impacts arising from the discharge of any contaminant or environmental pollutant;
f. adverse impacts associated with land instability, coastal inundation, or flooding;
g. adverse impacts on the landscape or amenity of an area; (i) adverse impacts on public
infrastructure;
h. adverse impacts on traffic or transportation; and
i. any other matter for consideration stated in section 46 of the Act.
6. Content of Preliminary Environmental Assessment Report
The PEAR shall be submitted in accordance with:
a. the Act; and
b. any EIA guidelines, development standards or planning provisions approved for this
purpose by the Board; and
c. any form specified or provided by the Agency; and
d. any direction made in writing by the Agency; and
39
e. Part 1 of the Schedule, unless otherwise directed by the Agency in writing.
7. Content of Comprehensive EIA
The EIA shall be submitted in accordance with:
a. the Act; and
b. any EIA guidelines, development standards or planning provisions approved for this
purpose by the Board; and
c. any form specified or provided by the Agency; and
d. any direction made in writing by the Agency; and
e. Part 2 of the Schedule, unless otherwise directed by the Agency in writing.
8. Baseline and Compliance Monitoring Schedule
1. In addition to the requirements stated in regulations 6 and 7 above, an EIA shall be
accompanied by a Schedule outlining a programme of baseline and compliance monitoring,
appropriate to the nature and scale of the application.
2. The Schedule referred to in subregulation (1) shall outline the baseline monitoring proposed
to be undertaken and also any subsequent monitoring (together with its proposed frequency
and methodology) intended to ensure compliance.
9. Review of PEAR and comprehensive EIA
1. The Agency shall review, or cause to be reviewed, any PEAR or comprehensive EIA
required and submitted as part of a development consent process.
2. In undertaking the review referred to in subregulation (1), the Agency shall, as part of that
review:
a. circulate the EIA to all other agencies known to have, or to be likely to have, a statutory
functional interest in the application, for their written comment; and,
b. specify such period for the receipt of any comments as is reasonable in the circumstance,
taking into account the nature and scale of the application and its associated
documentation.
3. The Agency shall prepare a written review report to be considered, pursuant to section 46 of
the Act with other relevant material before a decision on any development consent
40
application is made.
10. External Review might be undertaken
1. The Agency might determine that it does not possess, or has not currently available to it, the
necessary specialist skills to appropriately review an EIA and in such a circumstance it
might identify a suitable external reviewer and commission a report from that person.
2. Prior to commissioning any report under subregulation (1) and where the Agency intends to
recover the associated costs from the proponent, agreement to that course of action must be
obtained in writing from the proponent.
3. If the proponent does not agree to the course of action proposed by the Agency, and fails to
provide an alternate option to the satisfaction of the Agency, the development application
shall be deemed to be suspended until such time as this matter is resolved.
11. Public Consultation
1. The Agency might determine that further public consultation on an EIA is required either:
a. by the applicant; or
b. by the Agency.
2. The Agency must advise the proponent in writing of any such determination within 2 weeks
of receiving the EIA, including full details of the public process it proposes the applicant or
the Agency undertake and the reasons for that determination.
3. Any public consultation proposed under this Part must be consistent with any Board-
approved guideline and shall be completed before a decision is taken on the development
application pursuant to section 47 of the Act.
SCHEDULE - CONTENT OF AN EIA (regulations 6 and 7) Part 1:
1. A PEAR shall contain the following particulars: (a) a brief description of the development
proposal;
a. a brief description of the area to be affected and the nature of the proposed change to the
area
b. (including a location map and site plan);
c. a brief justification for the development proposal;
d. a summary of the stakeholder consultation undertaken, the general issues raised, and
responses to those issues;
41
e. an assessment of all reasonably foreseeable adverse and positive environmental impacts,
including long-term and short-term, primary and secondary consequences;
f. an indication of possible alternatives to mitigate any identified adverse environmental
impacts; and
g. an indication of measures that the proponent intends to take to mitigate or avoid
identified adverse environmental impacts.
Part 2:
1. A comprehensive EIA shall, where relevant, contain the following particulars:
a. Summary - each EIA shall contain a summary of the development proposal and its
consequences. The summary shall include:
i.
a statement of all major conclusions and recommendations; and
ii.
an outline of any issues that are controversial; and
iii.
an outline of issues that remain to be resolved; and
iv.
a summary of the stakeholder consultation undertaken, the general issues raised, and
responses to those issues; and
V.
an outline of the preferred choice among any alternatives; and
vi.
details of any proposals to mitigate significant adverse impacts.
b. Description and purpose of activity - each EIA shall include a description of the
development proposal (including any phasing or sequencing of activities), a statement of
its underlying purpose, and the long-term and short-term objectives sought by the
proponent. The statement shall further:
i.
generally describe the proposal's technical, economic, and environmental
characteristics, taking into consideration current engineering and supporting utility /
infrastructural data;
ii.
show the precise location and boundaries of the proposal on a detailed map; and
iii.
provide a justification of the rationale for the proposal including such supporting
information as is appropriate.
c. Alternatives - each EIA shall review the environmental impacts of the development
proposal and any practical alternatives to the proposal. In this section the proponent
shall:
i.
review and evaluate all reasonable alternatives, including locations and methods and
the alternative of no action; and
ii.
identify the proponent's preferred alternative or alternatives;
d. Affected environment - each EIA shall:
42
i.
describe the local environment in the vicinity of the proposal as it exists before
commencement of the proposal;
ii.
review and evaluate possible conflicts or inconsistencies between the development
proposal and relevant applicable objectives of national, regional or local land use and
marine / coastal plans (including Development Plans) and policies.
e. Environmental consequences - each EIA shall include an analysis of the environmental
consequences of the development proposal and, to the extent relevant, might include the
following:
i.
a review of direct and indirect environmental effects, their significance, and risks;
ii.
a consideration of any potential cumulative environmental impacts that might arise
in conjunction with other activities in the location;
iii.
a consideration of the environmental effects of alternatives;
iv.
an assessment of the likely need for additional infrastructure, including energy and
public utilities;
V.
an assessment of impacts on the area's physical locality and amenity (including
visual quality), its historic and cultural resources, and the design of the built
environment;
vi.
an assessment of social impacts on the local population and its uses of the land;
vii.
an assessment of the implications of the use of potential environmental pollutants;
viii.
a review of options proposed to mitigate adverse environmental impacts;
ix.
a description of any unavoidable adverse environmental impacts, including any
permanent change in the physical, biological, social or cultural characteristics of the
affected environment or in the possible future use of that environment;
X.
an analysis of the costs and benefits that might result from the development
proposal;
xi.
the identification of any irreversible or irretrievable commitments of resources
required for the development proposal.
f.
Mitigation and conditions - each EIA shall:
i.
identify any significant environmental impacts that cannot be avoided;
ii.
identify appropriate mitigation measures to minimise any significant environmental
impacts arising from the preferred alternative; and
iii.
recommend any proposed condition
43
ANNEX 7 - Environmental Project of Samoa
ENVIRONMENTAL PROFILE OF SAMOA
(EXCERPTED FROM SACEP ESMF)
Introduction
1.1 Background Information
Samoa is an island country surrounded by the Pacific Ocean. It includes two major
islands (Upolu and Savai'i), two smaller inhabited islands (Apolima and Manono), and
five uninhabited islands. The project areas would be concentrated in Upolu only. The
2
total land area is 2,935 km with a population of some 187,820 (2011 census).
Salient features of Samoa's population include the following:
Population density is 61 persons per km 2 of total area or 63.7 persons per km² of
inhabited area;
The annual demographic growth rate has been declining since 2001, mainly as a
result of a high level of migration to overseas countries. This outflow has resulted
in a loss of good people in the labor force, but creating a larger source of remittances
from those overseas.
There is only one ethnic group in Samoa (97% Polynesian) and more than 79% of the
population are living in rural areas working either as farmers or are partially involved
in farming activities.
Description of the Project Island - Upolu
The general characteristics of the two main islands are presented below.
Population
2
In 2011 the total population of Samoa was 187,820 of which 97 percent were Samoan
(Polynesian) and 3 percent non-Samoan, 52% being male and 48% female. The Samoan
population is one indigenous group. Total number of households was 28,182
with average household population of 7.2 persons. For Upolu, total population
is 143,418, with males comprising 73,934 (52%) and females 69,484 (48%). Total
number of households on Upolu is 21,747.
The basic demographic data on the two islands, based on the MAF/MOF agricultural
survey data (2005) are presented in Table 1. Total population of agriculturally active
household population by age and sex group is presented in Table 2.
44
Table 1: Key demographic data on population distribution in the two islands
Age Group
Region
All Age Groups
Under 15 Years
15 Years and Over
Total
Male
Female
Total
Male
Female
Total
Male
Femal
Total
198,598
102,078
96,520
80,021
41,627
38,394
118,577
60,452
58,126
Apia Urban Area
43,683
21,564
22,119
16,694
8,130
8,564
26,989
13,435
13,554
North West Upolu
60,563
31,408
29,154
24,151
12,612
11,540
36,412
18,796
17,615
Rest of Upolu
46,791
24,569
22,223
19,125
10,422
8,704
27,666
14,147
13,519
Savai'i
47,561
24,537
23,024
20,051
10,464
9,587
27,511
14,073
13,437
Source: MAF/MOF Agricultural Survey (2005)
Table 2: Total population of agriculturally active households by age group, sex and region
Age Group
Region
All Age Groups
Under 15 Years
15 Years and Over
Total
Male
Female
Total
Male
Female
Total
Male
Female
Samoa
157,909
82,036
75,873
64,347
33,860
30,487
93,561
48,175
45,386
Apia Urban Area
19,676
9,836
9,840
7,402
3,573
3,829
12,274
6,263
6,010
North West Upolu
47,014
24,578
22,436
18,849
9,882
8,967
28,166
14,697
13,469
Rest of Upolu
44,981
23,685
21,296
18,510
10,144
8,366
26,471
13,542
12,930
Savaii
46,237
23,936
22,301
19,586
10,262
9,324
26,652
13,674
12,977
Source: MAF/MOF Agricultural Survey (2005)
2.2
Education
Only 2 percent of the population had never been to school. The majority had achieved
education at secondary level, 55 percent, and 11 percent tertiary level. A goal of the
Millennium Development Project for Samoa is to achieve universal primary education in
the country by 2015.
2.3
Poverty
Concerning the basic needs poverty line, the 2008 Household Income and Expenditure
Survey (HIES) indicated 20.1% that shows an increase of 1% from 19.1% in 2002.
However the percentage for 2008 is thought not to reflect the economic downturn and
that it should have been much higher.
2.4
Economic Activities
The economy of Samoa is primarily based on agriculture, traditional bush-fallow and
mixed cropping techniques are used for the subsistence and/or cash crop farming.
2.5
Division of labor by gender
45
The main economic activities for persons 15 years and older in 2011 indicate that only
27.4 percent of females were actively involved in economic activities compared to males
with 72.6 percent being active. This pattern reflects the traditional Samoan household
where men deal mostly with the heavier work outside the house such as farming,
planting and fishing and income generating activities whereas women are more involved
in lighter work and household work.
Table 3: Economically active population 2006 & 2001
Economically
Active
Total
%
Male
%
Female
%
AUA
NWU
ROU
SAVAII
Total
47,881
100.0
34,763
72.6
13,778
27.4
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Employer
582
1.2
386
66.3
196
33.7
2.4
1.3
0.5
0.6
Employee
23,410
48.9
14,276
61.0
9,134
39.0
73.4
60.2
32.9
23.7
Self Employed
3,984
8.3
2,595
65.1
1,389
34.9
12.3
9.5
5.8
5.0
Make/Manufacture
goods for sale
1,040
2.2
491
47.2
549
52.8
1.6
2.0
2.9
2.3
Street Vendors
60
0.1
37
61.7
23
38.3
0.2
0.2
0.1
-
Produce for
use/sale
16,085
33.6
15,154
94.2
931
5.8
4.4
20.2
52.0
64.2
Look for a job
2,720
5.7
1,824
67.1
896.0
32.9
5.7
6.7
5.9
4.1
Source: Samoa Bureau of Statistics, Population and Housing Census 2011
2.6
Agricultural Population
Agricultural households
The Agriculture Survey 2005⁵³ indicated that of the 23,964 households in Samoa, 17,962,
or 75 percent, were agriculturally active households (that is, for home consumptions
only, mainly for home consumption and for commercial use). Savaii was the most
agriculturally active region with 96 percent agriculturally active and AUA the least with
69 percent agriculturally active.
Holdings
Households that were agriculturally active had a holding⁶ with an average of 2 parcels
5
2005 Agriculture Survey, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries and Ministry of Finance, Government
of Samoa. Note that the agricultural survey data is for 2005 whereas the population statistical
data discussed above is for 2006.
6
An agricultural holding is an economic unit of agricultural production under single management without
regard to title, legal form or size. Single management may be by an individual or household, jointly by
individuals or households by a clan, tribe or a juridical person such as a corporation, co-operative or
government agency. The holding may consist of parcels not in the same locality provided they share the
46
per holding in each region except for Savaii with had an average of 3.
Major crops
The major crops consumed and sold by hhs are coconuts, cocoa, bananas, taro, taro palagi
and taamu.
Livestock and poultry
Concerning cattle, 16 percent of households had cows, 10 percent heifers, 9 percent bulls,
5 percent steers and 10 percent calves. These hhs raised a total of 49.000 cattle of which
12,300 were slaughtered mostly for fa'alavelave, 1,700 were sold live and just over half
the total were reared in an 'enclosed own' system.
Concerning pigs, 51 of hhs had sows, 36, breeding boars, 28 gilts, 24 barrows and 48
piglets. They raised 258,000 pigs of which 88,700 were slaughtered mostly for
fa'alavelave, 8,200 live pigs were sold, and just over half the total were reared 'free
range'.
Concerning chickens, 69 percent of households (16,400hhs) reared 497,000 chickens of
which 233,800 chickens slaughtered and used mostly for consumption, and 98 percent
were reared by 'free range'.
2.7
Livestock Production
In Samoa, the family farms normally raise small livestock (pigs and/or chicken) that are
normally either grazing freely or are tended by women and children. The cattle is
normally tended by men and young male and are free grazing in fenced pastures. The
estimated livestock numbers in the two islands as of 2005 agricultural survey are
presented in Table 4.
Current livestock production is scattered throughout Samoan islands with Upolu having
the highest concentration of livestock and poultry. Table 4 presents the livestock
distribution by region as per the agricultural survey data (2005).
same production means such as labour, farm, buildings or machinery (2005 Agriculture Survey Ministry of
Agriculture and fisheries and Ministry of Finance, Government of Samoa)
47
Table 4: Estimated number of livestock and poultry in different regions of Samoa
REGION
Type of
Livestock
Samoa
Apia Urban
N.W. Upolu
Rest of Upolu
Savai'i
Area
CATTLE
Cows
16
1
2
7
6
Heifers
10
1
2
4
3
Bulls
9
1
1
4
3
Steers
5
0.5
0.5
2
2
Calves
10
1
1
4
4
PIG
Sows
51
5
12
15
19
Breeding
36
3
9
11
13
Boars
Gilts
28
2
6
9
11
Barrows
24
2
5
8
9
Piglets
48
4
12
15
17
CHICKEN
69
10
20
18
21
Source: MAF/MOF, Agricultural Survey (2005)
2.8
Agricultural Production
Agricultural production is varied and diversified. Approximately 60,000 ha or 21% of the
total land area is under crops or grazing regimes. Cropping areas are closely aligned with
the undulating coastal and alluvial soils close to village settlements. Pastoral and grazing
areas are restricted to the steeper slopes where water supply is adequate. The cultivated
land per capita is estimated at 0.65 ha, and the average farm size at about nine ha.
The national food demand rises by about 2.3 percent annually, largely because of
population growth and changes in population structure. The main food crops are taro,
banana, coconut, cocoa, fruit trees, vegetables and other root crops. The composition,
stability and reliability of local food supplies have been negatively influenced by natural
disasters like cyclones and the recent tsunami and the devastation of taro by Taro Leaf
Blight (TLB) that seriously reduced taro production.
Local consumption and export of Taro has increased significantly over the last four
years, which reflects the improvement of the blight resistant varieties and the increase in
the availability of planting material. Taro would therefore continue to be the most
important crop in Samoa not only because it is the staple crop but due to its high return to
labor input.
48
The main crops grown in the two islands as per the statistical data collected by MAF and
published by MOF in 2005 are provided in Table 5.
Table 5: Estimated single crop equivalent area by major crops and region in
acres
Region
Type of Crops
Grown
Total
Apia Urban Area
N.W. Upolu
Rest of Upolu
Savai'i
Total
45,056
2,760
11,309
12,057
15,213
Cocoa Samoa
6,945
230
1,758
1,454
2,877
Cocoa Solomon
263
1
51
75
125
Taro
11,932
546
1,988
3,983
3,738
Ta'amu
6,142
187
1,648
1,331
2,631
Cassava
101
3
15
3
29
Kava
110
2
28
3
72
Banana
19,563
1,791
5,821
5,208
5,741
Source: MAF/MOF, Agricultural Survey (2005)
2.9
Fisheries Production
Samoa's fisheries sector Information from the show that the fisheries sector relies mainly
on its offshore and inshore reef and lagoon fish resources (MAF, 2011. Agriculture Sector
Plan 2011-2015). The total offshore fisheries output for 2001 was estimated at 6,180 mt
valued at SAT 50.7 million with 80% exported valued at SAT 45 million (Faasili & Time,
2006). Official estimates from the Central Bank of Samoa (CBS) show that exports of fish
grew from more than SAT 25 million in 1998 to SAT 36 million in 2001 however, export
values post - 2002 declined to as low as SAT 11.5 million (2005) and despite a slight
improvement in 2007 valued at SAT 20 million has continued to decline in the following
years. The variability in the reported data as exhibited for 2001 is attributed to the periodic
pricing of fish used by MAF to estimate values while CBS utilises an annual average to
value production. Therefore, although both agencies utilise the same provisional forms to
record data, estimates for the value of fisheries still differ thus emphasizing the need for
quality control of the data (Gillet, 2009).
The inshore coastal fishery of Samoa plays a vital role in the livelihood of village
economies with an estimated subsistence catch of 7,169 tons valued at SAT 45 million in
2000 (Passfield, 2001). However, there has been a noticeable decline in inshore resources
which has been linked to the use of destructive albeit efficient fishing methods, loss of
49
habitat and increased commercial harvesting traded fresh or processed and for 'faaoso' for
family and relatives overseas (MAF, 2011. Ibid). Land reclamation and road construction
have also been known to destroy fish nursery areas and poor land management has led to
erosion and consequent siltation of lagoons. The emphasis therefore for the subsector is
conservation and sustainable management.
The 2009 agriculture census showed that 24.8% of households were engaged in fishing
reflecting a 24% decline in the proportion of households engaged in fishing over the past
decade (from 32.6% in 1999). The 2009 agriculture census also indicated that the vast
majority fished mainly or entirely for home consumption, and only a small portion fished
for commercial reasons.
Offshore long line fishing, predominantly tuna fishing, has been very consistent in leading
the export earnings for the country since its humble beginnings in the early 1990's. At
present, the industry is faced with the challenge of optimizing benefits and returns to the
industry and the people of Samoa while at the same time ensuring that the fish stocks
available within the EEZ are harvested in a sustainable manner.
The trend of the number of active fishing vessels licensed between 2003 and 2009 saw an
average 14% decline in fishing vessels between 2007 and 2009 as shown in Figure 11
below.
Figure 1: Number of Active Long Line Fishing Vessels 2003 - 2009
Number of Active Fishing Vessels
2003 2009
70
60
50
No. of Vessels
40
30
20
10
o
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
Year
Source: Fisheries Division, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
Figure 12 below shows that despite the fall in the number of active fishing vessels shown
above, the total landed catch for the period illustrated an increasing trend. However,
export values for the period were low due to the fall in unit value of fish attributed to
global market prices as well as the global economic crisis in 2008 to 2009.
Inshore fisheries management depend heavily on the use of Fisheries Management Plans
prepared with the assistance of the Fisheries Division. The FMPs identify main issues
7
Consignments of seafood sent as gifts to relatives overseas.
50
affecting village controlled fisheries and prescribe measures for the mitigation and
management. Villages also enact bylaws recognized by the Courts to help enforcement.
MAF Fisheries 2011 Annual Report noted 91 villages have functioning fisheries
management plans, and 60 villages have progressed plan implementation to the stage
where they have established active fisheries reserves.
The 2009 tsunami caused severe damage to large portions of live coral reefs on the
southern part of Upolu Islands and several community owned fisheries reserves were
damaged. As part of recovery actions, 18 village reserves were replanted with live corals
and cemented fish houses and 43 village fish reserves who lost ropes and buoys
demarcating reserve boundaries had their boundaries replaced.
2.10
Potable water
According to available statistical data 80% of the population of the four regions has
access to safe drinking water. There is still a large percentage of the population without
metered water. For drinking water, 48 percent had drinking water from metered water, 36
percent used tap water, 8 percent used stored rainwater, 5 percent bought purified water
and 2.5 percent used well or spring water. Many farm households, especially in Savai'I
are harvesting rooftop rainwater for drinking, using concrete and/or plastic tanks.
2.11
Access to credit
Lack of access to credit is a problem for both rural men and women, due to high interest
rates and collateral requirements. The Development Bank of Samoa is using high interest
rate of around 14% for agricultural and rural development loans that makes use of credit
for agricultural development quite difficult. Some NGOs such as WIBDI have been
involved in providing access to fund to local farmers by purchasing their certified organic
produce at the farm gate and providing the needed cash to the farmers. However, such
funds are available only after farmers are certified and have spent their own or borrowed
capital to finance their farming activities.
2.12
Distribution of electricity in rural areas
Around 97% of total households have access to electricity with only a small percentage
using benzene and kerosene for lighting.
Around 81 percent of households used firewood for cooking (often in combination with
another source such as gas, kerosene or electricity).
3
Bio-Physical Environment
The Samoan islands are of volcanic origin dominated by olivine basaltic rocks. Most soils
of the two larger Samoan islands are classified as belonging to the Inceptisols soil order
as per Soil Taxonomy and Cambisols according to the Word Soil Resource classification
system. The area is generally mountainous and consists of relatively few areas of flat or
undulating land suitable for agriculture or village settlements, mainly in the lowland
areas. Settlements on both major inhabited islands of Upolu and Savai'i are concentrated
on the coastal plains and rolling slopes. The non-arable land area is estimated to account
51
for approximately 43% of the total land area. A further 4% is unsuitable for cultivation
due to lava flows, especially on Savai'i.
3.1
Land Tenure
The Fa'a Samoa or Samoan way is the complicated set of social rules that define every
aspect of life, including land tenure, in Samoa. Key elements of thefa's Samoa are the
aiga, the matai, fa'alavelave, and traditional land tenure. The Samoan land tenure system
is derived from the system of family organization. A village is divided into a number of
extended family groups (aiga), each with its own elected heads of family (matai). The
matai takes the pule (authority, responsibility, privilege) and mamalu (dignity, respect,
honor) associated with the title that includes control over the family-land (Lockwood,
1971).
The productivity of each aiga is dependent on the capability, initiative, and
motivation of the matai who has complete control and jurisdiction over the entire
village. The fono is responsible for the socio-economic welfare of the village and
instructs the untitled men (labor force) to carry out various activities. An additional
position in the village is that of the pulenuu, an elected official, whose responsibility
is to interact with the Government. In lieu of his services, the pulenuu is paid an
honorarium by the government.
Holmes (1970) summarized the customary land tenure system in Samoa into five
different categories:
Village House Lots: Each village is divided into family household lots, with
boundaries marked often by some natural features such as trees, rocks, etc.
Breadfruit (Artocarpus altitus), coconuts (Cocos nucifera L.), papaya (Carica
papaya L.), banana (Musa spp.), taro (Colocasia esculenta L. Schott), taamu
(Alocasia sp.), and cocoa (Theobroma cacao L.) might be found on these lands.
Plantation Lots: The plantation lots lie around the village. Cutomary lands
average approximately 500 acres per village. It is normally from the plantation
lots that the family produces the most of its food requirement.
Family Reserves: Beyond the plantation lots and higher on the mountain slopes
is the land associated with different families of the village. Only part of this
land is cultivated at any one time (shifting cultivation) to prevent soil fertility
exhaustion of the whole area.
Village Land: The village land lies within the village boundaries, mostly
stretching from the sea to the mountain ridge, but does not belong to individual
families. On bush lands, individuals might be allowed to clear new areas for
plantation purposes with the permission of village council.
District Land: The district lands are claimed by the traditional district councils
and have mostly political significance. These lands, located high on the
mountains, are little used except for hunting or collection of forest products.
Out of the total land of Samoa, according to the 2005 agricultural survey (MOF, 2005),
52
some 93.5% is owned by village under the traditional land tenure system. The rest are
leased customary lands (0.4%), leased government land (2.4%), owned freehold land
(3%), leased freehold land (04%), and other land tenure (0.3%). Renewable, 20 year
long, leasing arrangement can be made on freehold and government land. Under the
traditional social structure, customary lands cannot be sold. Previously there were no
provisions for individual use and development of land, causing lack of security of tenure.
In recent years, however, such customary land can be leased, if matai approves, and have
been availed for leasing.
3.2 Geography and Geology
Samoa lies in the South Pacific Ocean within the 480 km long Samoan archipelago in a
west north-west to east south-east orientation. Samoa is located between 13° 15' and 14°
5' South latitude and 171° 23' and 172° 48' West longitude. It is comprised of two
large islands of Savai'i (approximately 1,700 km²) and Upolu (approximately 1115
km²), two small inhabited islands of Manono and Apolima, and five smaller uninhabited
islands. The total area of the two major islands is about 2820 km². It is part of the
Samoan archipelago. The other smaller islands, being Tutuila, Ofu, Olosega, Ta'u, and
Rose, are all part of American Samoa.
In Upolu, the main mountain ridge runs along the length of the island with mountains
rising as high as 1,500 msal. Savai'I ridge also lies along the length of island, but since
the island is wider, there are several smaller mountain ranges that converge to the main
ridge. The highest point in Savai'I (and Samoa) is Mt. Silisili near the middle of the
island with an approximate height of some 2,000 masl.
The Samoan islands are of recent volcanic origin, the oldest lavas on the islands are about
one million years old (Tarling, 1962). The two main islands are composed almost entirely
of basic volcanic rocks (olivine basalt), picrite basalt, and somewhat more acidic olivine
dolerite.
3.3 Land Use Pattern
The existing agricultural land use pattern is either based on subsistence farming or
plantation cropping and is generally confined to the lowland and foothill areas up to
about 230 masl (Pak-Poy and Kneebone, 1981). In areas of gentle slope and higher
population pressure such as North-west Upolu, agricultural development extends to
elevations of as high as 300 masl. Most of the high intensity agricultural production lands
are within the 75 masl and within the coastal lowland physiographic unit of both islands.
The "typical" distribution of crops relative to elevation and slope in Upolu is summarized
in Table 6.
Table 6: Cropping pattern (land use) in Samoa by physiographic position
Elevation
Crop Classification
Main crop types
(masl)
53
0-30
Food crops
Coconuts⁵, food crops, pineapples,
breadfruit, taro, pasture &cattle
30-150
Cash & plantation crops
Cocoa, coconut, taro (main coconut
150-225
Banana and cocoa plantations (mainly
banana plantations)
225-300
Selected root crops
Ta'amu, coconut, pasture and cattle, taro
>300
Primary and close
Sporadic pasture and cattle
canopy secondary
Source: Fox and Cumberland, 1972.
ADB (1985) produced a land use pattern and the area under trees crops based on aerial
photo interpretation that is presented in Table 7 that estimated the total area under tree
crops in the two islands to be 77,211 ha.
Table 7: Major area of tree crops in Islands of Upolu and Savai'I based on API
Island
Coconut
Coconut
Cocoa
Coconut +
Coconut
Cocoa +
Total
+ Cocoa
Cocoa +
+
Banana
Banana
Banana
Upolu
21,190
11,324
3,496
3,598
3,617
2,152
45,377
Savai'i
15,616
8,332
2,546
4,556
156
628
31,838
Total
36,806
19,656
6,042
8,154
3,773
2,780
77,211
Most recently FAO in cooperation with then MAFFM (2004) prepared an inventory of
Samoa land cover with emphasis on forest types using the 1999 aerial photography and
spatial analysis, using GIS based SamFRIS program. The results, although does not
provide full distribution of land use due to concentrating on forestry inventory, is very
useful in identifying major tree crops and forest types in all Samoan islands. Figures 1
presents the FAO/MAFFRA produced land cover map of Upolu and Savai'i,
respectively. Table 8 presents the major vegetation types in the two major islands.
Table 8: Major vegetation types in the two islands of Upolu and Savai'I based on
API and ground-truthing by FAO/MAFFM (2004)
Main Vegetation type
Savai'i
Upolu
Grand Total
Percent of Samoa
Barren land (B)
1973.4
30.3
2004.7
0.71
Bush (BU)
1771.8
5291.4
7098.0
2.50
Medium Forest (FM)
72151.0
402.5
72563.0
25.53
Open Forest (FO)
22271.9
33049.4
55348.0
19.48
Primary Forest (FP)
3797.7
1304.9
5102.5
1.80
Secondary forest (FS)
19800.0
17296.0
37173.0
13.08
Grassland (G)
5193.0
12299.2
17494.0
6.16
54
Infrastructure (I)
31.8
431.7
463.5
0.16
Lakes (L)
16.1
202.7
218.8
0.08
Mangroves (M)
16.4
353.2
396.6
0.13
Mixed crops (MC)
2463.0
7706.3
10228.0
3.60
Coconut plantation (P)
26157.9
26770.2
53114.0
18.69
Rivers (R)
22.5
42.0
64.4
0.02
Scrubs (SC)
15065.6
7000.1
22115.0
7.78
Wetlands (WL)
147.8
597.4
745.1
0.26
Grand Total
170879.4
112776.9
284184
100
55
DRESTRY
MY
SION
Samoa Land Cover 1999
NON
INSTRY OF AGRICULTURE
THE
9917
047
0317
7
Figure 1: Land use map of Samoa
070
9917
Legend
Barren land
Built up Area
902
Closed Forest
Medium Forest
-9913
112
Open Forest
Forest Plantation
VII
Secondary Forest
Grassland
U15
Infrastructure
Lakes
VIB
9910
UNA
Mangroves
993
Mixed Crops
VIT
Coconut Plantation
017
8
Rivers
N
Scrub
0
10
20
Wetland
E
kilometers
Plot location
(Based on 1999 Air Photography and 2004 ground truthing)
Physiographic Units
The main physiographic units identified in Samoa include (1) low land and
foothills where elevation is generally below 650 masl and the upland
physiographic unit above 650 masl.
The sub units under the lowland and foothills physiographic unit include:
Marine marsh physiographic unit with poorly drained soils and aquic moisture regime
forming in estuaries and marine marshes;
Beach areas and coastal margins physiographic unit with excessively well
drained (beach sand units) to poorly drained (peaty or mottled loamy sand in low
land physiographic areas);
Valley floors and depressions with varying moisture characteristics from poorly
drained units in peaty parent material in organic residues to well to excessively
drained units formed in mafic alluvial material; and
Hill country physiographic unit that can be divided to subunits with moderate
dry season (less than 4 cumulative months of dry soil moisture regime) and units
with no or weak dry season (less than 4 cumulative months with dry soil
moisture characteristic). Each of the subunits can be further divided to (i) very
slightly dissected landscape with somewhat to excessively drained soil units, (ii)
slightly dissected landscape with well drained soils, (iii) moderately dissected
with well drained soils, and strongly dissected landscapes with well drained
soils. The subunits under the upland physiographic unit include:
Upland swamps and depressions unit with poorly drained units formed in recent
alluvium, colluviums, and organic residues with aquic moisture regime; and
Soils of the upland hill country physiographic unit have a perudic soil moisture
regime, indicating that the cumulative dry soil moisture is less than 4 months.
They are further subdivided to (i) very slightly dissected landscape with
moderately well drained to excessively well drained character, (ii) slightly
dissected landscape with well to moderately well drained character, and (iii)
moderately dissected landscape with moderately well drained to well drained
character.
3.5
Soils
The Samoan islands are formed from basic volcanic rocks and their derived soils are rich
in mafic minerals such as olivine basalt and andesite causing a variation in soil texture
that ranges from sandy loam to clay loam. In the coastal areas sandy loam soils are
dominant. Taxonimcally, soils of the two major islands are dominated by Inceptisols
(Humitropepts and Dystrandepts), with smaller areas of Oxisols (Acroorthox and
Umbriorthox), and Mollisols (Hapludolls).
The estimated water holding capacity is less than 120 mm per meter of soil depth. The
main limiting factors of Samoan soils for crop production, based on limited data
57
available in maps at the scale of 1:31,680 for Upolu and 1:100,000 for Samoa developed
by Wright (1963) can be summarized as follows:
Depth of soil that appears to be generally shallow that makes tree crops
prone to wind damage;
Stoniness and rockiness of the soil (approximately 75% of the area under tree
crops) which results in high labor requirements and makes mechanization in
most areas impossible; and
The unstable nature of land on steep slopes particularly on the central
upland and upland regions of both islands that can limit the cultivation of
crops and removal of rocks that can significantly induce accelerated soil
erosion in such areas.
In general the soil temperature regime, an indication of soil suitability for production of
different crops changes at approximate elevation of 650 m from isohyperthermic (average
soil temperature at 50 cm depth of >22°C with an annual variation in soil temperature of
less than 5°C) in lowlands and foothills physiographic units to isothermic (average soil
temperature at 50 cm depth of 15-22°C with an annual variation in soil temperature of
less than 5°C) in upland physiographic unit.
3.6
Topography
The overall topography of the two major islands are classified into four general categories
by Wright (1963). The topographic categories are assigned based on elevation and
overall landscape position. The main categories include: (i) lowlands; (ii) foothills; (iii)
uplands; and (iv) highlands. However, the topography is quite variable and landscape
position is probably the best method of determining the effect of topography on soil and
vegetation development and land use planning.
The original lava flows, indicated by most recent lava flows in the island of Savai'i, have
a rolling surface to a highly irregular surface with abrupt depressions and mounds. Steep
hills and ridges are created by individual streams of lava, and steep slopes exist on the
sides of cones. The overall slope of island varies from nearly level along the coastal areas
(shoreline) to moderately sloping, following the slopes of the original lava flows.
However, in some areas, geologic erosion has cut steep sloping valleys into the original
slopes, creating some very steep backslopes or abrupt cliffs, and occasionally a nearly
level valley floors. All these conditions have significant effect on soil formation, its depth
and rockiness.
3.7
Climate
Samoa is characterized by a tropical rain-forest climate and is generally hot and wet.
Mean lowland and upland temperatures range from 26 - 28°C and 20 - 22°C respectively.
There is relatively little seasonal variation in both temperature and relative humidity.
There is generally a decrease in average annual temperature from coastal areas toward the
58
center of the islands (inland), mainly due to rise in elevation. Analysis of diurnal
fluctuations at the Apia observatory by Kammer (1978) indicates that the mean
maximum temperature occurs between 11:00 and 15:00 hours and the minimum around
05:00 hours. The mean daily temperature is highest during the dry season when cloud
cover is lowest, highest temperatures occurring between January and April. The lowest
temperatures occur during the winter months of July and August. Annual rainfall is about
3000 mm which exceeds significantly the annual evapotranspiration (ETo), which is
estimated to be in the range of 1480 mm. 60 % of the precipitation occurs between
November and March while the driest months are June - August. Annual variations in
other parts of the islands show a similar pattern to that of Apia with mean annual
temperature falling lower due to increase in elevation inland. Mean annual air
temperatures ranges from 27.4°C in coastal areas to less than 15°C in the highest
elevation of Savai'i Island. The Tmax and Tmin officially recorded in Samoa are 35.3°C
recorded at Asau station on 24ᵗʰ December 1968, and 11.1°C recorded at Afiamalu
station in Savai'i on 29 September 1971 (Saifaleupolu, 1986). Table 9 presents the
climatic norms for the period of 1971 - 2000 for Apia based on the available data.
Southeasterly surface winds, better known as trade winds, blow more than 50% of the
time during the year (Kammer, 1978). During the dry seasons of Might to October, the
south-east winds blow for more than 80% of the time. During the wet season, however,
the wind direction is less consistent, but the south-easterlies still prevail for more than
30% of the time. The change in wind direction in Samoan islands is contributed to the
migration of the South Pacific Convergence Zone (SPCZ).
59
Table 9: Climatic Norms 1971 - 2000, Station Apia (Meteorology Division data, Apia)
MIG
Norms
JAN
FEB
MAR
APR
JUN
JUL
AUG
SEP
OCT
NOV
DEC
Total
HT
Rainfall (mm)
489
389
352
211
193
121
121
113
154
224
262
358
2965
Pressure (bar)
1009
1010
1010
1011
1012
1013
1013
1013
10 13
1012
1011
1008
Sunshine (h)
149
160
173
186
193
197
213
219
207
199
181
154
2230
Tmax °C
30
31
31
31
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
31
Tmin °C
23.9
24.2
24.0
23.8
23.4
23.2
22.6
22.8
23.1
23.4
23.6
23.8
Tmean °C
27.1
27.4
27.3
27.2
26.9
26.6
26.1
26.2
26.5
26.8
26.9
27.2
ETmax °C
33.4
34.0
33.7
33.2
33.6
32.5
31.7
32.1
32.8
32.4
33.1
34.9
Etmin °C
19.4
21.1
21.2
19.5
17.9
17.6
18.9
18.1
18.1
19.4
19.2
20.7
60
Due to the favorable rainfall and temperature, all year-round crop cultivation is possible.
However, there are (even in the wet season) long dry periods between rainfall events that
can last up to 22 days. These dry spells emphasize the need for introduction of
supplementary irrigation if crop intensification (two crops per year) is going to be
promoted, especially for shallow rooted crops.
The reference crop evapotranspirartion (ETo) was calculated by FAO for Samoa (2004)
by means of the modified Penman-Monthien formula using FAO Irrigation and Drainage
Paper No 52 procedures. The necessary data were obtained by the consultant from the
Meteorological Station in Apia, being the only station that measures wind speed and
relative humidity in Samoa. However, since the mean temperature, wind speed and
humidity fluctuate very little in the coastal and low-lying areas of Samoa where most
suitable land for farming are located, it is believed that the calculated data for Apia,
presented in Table 11, can also be used with adequate accuracy for other locations within
agricultural areas.
Table 11: Values of ETo for Apia (mm/day)
Fe
Ma
Ap
Migh
Ju
Ju
Au
Se
Oc
No
De
Jan
Total
b
r
r
t
n
I
g
n
t
V
c
ETo
1483
4.
mm
4.4
4.0
3.7
3.5
3.8
3.4
4.2
4.5
4.6
4.5
4.2
(mm/
1
/d
3.6
Vegetation Classification
Vegetation of the West Samoan islands is divided to five major units through the
work of whistler (1980):
Strand vegetation;
Vegetation of the plains and lower montane region
Forest of the upper montane region, rainforest and fern forest;
Ridge forest vegetation; and
Vegetation of recent lava flows.
The natural vegetation, specific to these islands, consists of cloud forest and smaller
amount of lava flow scrub and herbaceous vegetation of cinder and ash deposits, and
montane meadows, especially in Savai'i. Many species of animals and plants found are
endemic to Savai'i and occur only in the highlands (Whistler, 1978).
Considering the scarcity of published work on flora and fauna of Samoa, it is difficult to
provide a classification system that can satisfy plant cover of the main regions or major
fauna in each agro-ecological zone. Whistler (1980) prepared a plant community
classification system, based on his extensive work in American Samoa and determined 16
climax communities under five main vegetation categories. According to Whistler, this
classification system is also applicable to Samoa with more plant communities being
61
present in Samoa due to its sheer size and variation in topography. The proposed
vegetation classification is presented below:
Littoral Vegetation
Lepturus rock strand
Ipomoea sand strand
Littoral shrubland
Pandanus littoral strand
Barringtonia littoral forest
Wetland Vegetation
Costal marsh
Mangrove forest
Rain Forest Vegetation
"Au'auli" (Diospyros spp., Syzygium spp.) coastal forest
Asi (Syzygium inophylloides) ridge forest
Mamala (Dysoxylum samoense) lowland forest
Tava (Poemtia pinnata) lowland forest
Maota-mea (Dysoxylum huntii) montane forest
Fega-vao (Syzygium samoense) cloud forest
Scrubby Summit Vegetation
Montane scrub
Disturbed Vegetation
Managed land
Kula (Dicranopeteris) fernland
Disturbed forest
Rhus secondary forest
A relatively recent attempt by FAO and MAFFM (2004) to map the land cover, using
API and groundtruthing has provided an inventory of major land uses related to forestry
and forest cover. This mapping, produced based on 1999 aerial photography, although is
not providing with a taxonomic classification or cataloguing of flora and fauna, provide a
good visual representation of the forest cover and to a lesser extent agro forestry activities
in the two main islands (Figure 1).
3.7
Biodiversity National Parks and nature Reserves
According to the newly prepared publication by CI, MNREM, and SCREP (2010),
62
terrestrial fauna of Samoa include more than 2,500 species of insect, 770 species of
native plants, 64 native land snails, 31 breeding birds, 14 reptiles and 3 native mammals.
Marine diversity is also high with 890 coral reef fish, over 200 corals and several turtles,
whales and dolphins. It is interesting to note that approximately 30% of Samoa's native
biodiversity is endemic to Samoa and are not found anywhere else.
Samoa is a very rich country in biodiversity of flora and fauna. She has more native
species of ferns and butterflies than New Zealand, a country 85 times bigger than Samoa!
Manumea or Tooth-billed Pigeon, the national bird of Samoa (endangered, Didinculus
strigirostris) is now very rare and restricted to mature native forests. In total, 76 species
from Samoa are included on the 2009 IUCN Redlist as threatened species include 52
corals, 11 marine fish, 7 birds, 2 turtles, 2 plants, a land snail and a mammal. Many more
species are believed threatened but have not yet made it onto the IUCN Redlist, or are on
the Redlist but not classified as threatened.
In 2003, the Conservation International-Pacific Islands Program initiated a process to
identify data-driven conservation targets for the Polynesia-Micronesia region including
Samoa. In total, six key biodiversity areas (KBAs) were identified in Samoa through this
study. Later, in
2008, through a GEF funded project, CI in association with MNREM, SCREP identified
another 8 terrestrial and 7 marine KBAs in Samoa.
Currently 11 terrestrial species present in Samoa are classified as threatened in the 2009
IUCN redlist. In addition to the mentioned 11 terrestrial species, an additional three
species known to be threatened in Samoa were added as "trigger" species (species that
trigger a KBA) including ifilele (Mollucan ironwood) and taio (Polynesian Storm Petrel)
that are both classified as vulnerable, but are not recorded for Samoa on the IUCN
Redlist, and pea vao (Samoan flying fox), recorded as near threatened on the Redlist that
is actually highly threatened in Samoa.
The biggest threats to Samoa's biodiversity, as stated in the recent publication by
CI/SCREP (2010) are habitat destruction due to agricultural development, housing and
other development, the over-harvest of resources and the impact of invasive species of
pests and weeds. It is important to ensure that project activities do not include areas
identified as KBAs, national parks, nature reserves and their buffer zones.
The areas identified as nature reserve and national parks are demarcated by MNREM
department of Forestry and the most recent map is presented in Figure 2.
63
Figure 2: Map of Upolu and Savai'i showing the nature reserve and national parks
(Source: Forestry Division, MNREM)
Ecosystem
Samoa National Parks, Reserves, MPAs
(from Pearsall and Whistler 1991)
Cloud forest
and Community Conservation Areas
Coastal forest
Fernland
Grassland
Herbacaeous Marsh
Littoral forest
Littoral scrub
Legend
Lowland forest
Mangrove forest
National Park/Reserve
Falealupo CA
Montane forest
Ridge forest
Community managed site
Swamp forest
Secondary forest
Volcanic succession
Non-native forest
Asau-Falelima|NP
Lake
Disturbed coastal
Disturbed herbaceous marsh
Disturbed littoral forest
Disturbed lowland forest
Disturbed mangrove forest
Mauga Salafai NP
Disturbed Ridge forest
Disturbed swamp forest
Lata NP
Disturbed secondary forest
⑈
Mt Vaea Reserve
Palolo Deep Marine Reserve
Name_of_site
Conservation_Type
Area_Ha
Laulii CA
Falealupo CA
Community Conservation Area
722.166
Lake Lanotoo
Uafato CA
Community Conservation Area
1,161.37
NP
Proposed extension to
O le Pupu Pue NP
National Park/Reserve
4,230.62
OLPP NP
Mt Vaea Reserve
National Park/Reserve
89.1303
Saanapu-Sataoa CA
Community Conservation Area
52.8378
Uafato CA
Asau-Falelima NP
National Park/Reserve
1,887.61
Lata NP
National Park/Reserve
3,731.98
Mauga Salafai NP
National Park/Reserve
5,973.59
Ole Pupu Pue NP
Lake Lanotoo NP
National Park/Reserve
469.952
Forestry Site
National Park/Reserve
768.64
Safata MPA
Laulii CA
Community Conservation Area
400
Proposed extension to NP
National Park/Reserve
10,000
Aleipata MPA
N
0
15
30
W
E
Name_of_site
Conservation_Type
Area_Ha
kilometres
CONSERVATION
INTERNATIONAL
Aleipata MPA
Marine Protected Area
4,255
PACIFIC ISLANDS
Safata MPA
Marine Protected Area
1,845
Palolo Deep Marine Reserve
Marine Protected Area
22
Major conservation sites identified in Figure 4.2 are further explained in Table 12.
64
Table 12: List of Major Conservation/Nature reserve sites in Samoa
Name of Reserve
Conservation type
Area (ha)
Terrestrial
Aleipata MPA
Marine Protected Area
4,255.00
Marine
Assau-Falelima NP
National Park/Reserve
1,887.61
Terrestrial
Falealupo CA
Community Conservation area
722.17
Terrestrial
Forestry Site
National Park/Reserve
768.64
Terrestrial
Lake Lanotoo NP
National Park/Reserve
469.95
Terrestrial
Lata NP
National Park/Reserve
3,731.98
Terrestrial
Laulii CA
Community Conservation Area
400.00
Terrestrial
Mauga Salafai NP
National Park/Reserve
5,973.59
Terrestrial
Mt. Vaea Reserve
National Park/Reserve
89.13
Terrestrial
O le Pupu Pue NP
National Park/Reserve
4,230.62
Terrestrial
Proposed extension to NP
National Park/Reserve
10,000.00
Terrestrial
Saanapu-Sataoa CA
Community Conservation Area
52.84
Terrestrial
Safata MPA
Marine Protected Area
1,845.00
Marine
Uafato CA
Community Conservation Area
1,161.37
Terrestrial
Palolo Deep Marine Reserve
Marine Protected Area
22.00
Marine
3.8
Forests
More than 60% of the country is forested with primary forest covering 1.8% of the highland
areas, especially in the island of Savai'i. According to the 2004 forest survey data produced by
FAO and MAFFRA indicated that 46.8% of Upolu and 69.1% of Savai'i were covered by some
type of forest cover.
The majority of rural population, at various levels, relies on forest products for food, medicine,
firewood and construction materials. Samoa is blessed with a variety of tropical forests.
Unfortunately, currently there are no government laws to prevent logging of primary native
forests that can potentially impact the floral and indirectly faunal biodiversity in Samoa. Less
than % of Samoa's unprotected forest is protected by law as forest reserve. Currently most of
the primary forests in the higher elevations in both islands are protected from logging due to lack
of access roads. Project activities should ensure that no access roads would be improved or
expand into the areas close to the primary forest buffer zone.
(Forest types such as natural, gazette, National park/reserves, customary forests, plantation
forests, etc.)
5
Livelihood - Environmental-Social Linkages
5.1
Logging
Logging operations among the villagers and clear cutting by internationals logging companies
65
used to result in extensive deforestation exposing the soils to various agents of erosion. Since
three years ago, commercial logging has been banned in Samoa and clear cutting has been
stopped. However, cutting of trees, even old forest stands by individual villagers for use or to
convert the land to other uses is not regulated and is ongoing.
5.2
Soil Erosion
Currently due to presence of a good ground cover, soil erosion is not considered as a major
source of concern in Samoa. However, if intensive agricultural and livestock production is
promoted and land cover is reduced or removed, there would be a danger of increasing
accelerated soil erosion, considering the volcanic nature of the land and high erodibility of most
soils on steep slopes in the islands. Continuous/intensive cropping, rock removal, and irrigation
can all lead to increase in accelerated soil erosion if appropriate soil conservation measures are
not also included in agricultural production packages.
66
ANNEX 8 - Social Assessment
SOCIAL ASSESSMENT
(Excerpts from Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhancement Project - Social
Review)
67
ACRONYMS
SIA officers
Social assessment advisory officers
A
Answer
CLGF
Commonwealth Local Government Fund
ESMF
Environmental and Social Monitoring Framework
EIA
Environmental Impact Assessment
EU
European Union
FAO
Food and Agricultural Organisation
GoS
Government of Samoa
Hh
Household
IPP
Indigenous Peoples Plan
IA
Internal Affairs, Ministry of Women, Community and Social
Development
IAIA
International Association for Impact Assessment
MAF
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
MOF
Ministry of Finance
MNRE
Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment
MWCSD
Ministry of Women, Community and Social Development
NZ
New Zealand
PAD
Project appraisal document
PEAR
Preliminary Environmental Assessment Report
PUMA
Planning Urban Management Agency
PSSF
Private Sector Support Facility
Q
Question
The project
Agriculture Competitiveness Enhancement Project
SACEP: SASA
Samoa agriculture competitiveness enhancement project: Social
Assessment and Stakeholder Analysis
SASSA
South African Social Security Agency
SBEC
Small Business Enterprise Centre
SDS
Strategic Development for Samoa
TA
Technical Assistance
TOR
Terms of Reference
VDC
Village Development Committee
WIBDI
Women in Business Development Incorporated
WD
Women's Division, Ministry of Women, Community and Social
Development
WB
World Bank
UN
United Nations
UNDP
United Nations Development Program
68
1. POPULATION
Information about the Samoan population and in particular the agricultural sector provides an
overall context for the project. This information also provides a baseline against which any
changes resulting from the project could be measured.
3.1 The Samoan Population
In 2006⁸ the total population of Samoa was 180,741 (an increase of three percent on the 2001
Census). Of the total population, 97 percent were Samoan and 3 percent non-Samoan.
Samoans are ethnically Polynesians as indicated in census data relating to the population of
Samoa⁹.
Of the total population, 52 percent are males and 48 percent females (the percentages were
consistent with those from the three previous Censuses). Female headed households were
2,769 (20 percent) in 2006, a rise of 2 percent since 2001.
The age dependency ratio indicated the greatest dependency burden of the population (with the
highest percentages in the dependent age groups of 0-14 and 65+) was in the rural regions and
particularly Savaii followed by the Rest of Upolu (ROU). However in the last three censuses,
the child dependency ratios have declined and the old age dependency ratios increased as the
old age group has grown. The average life expectancy in Samoa is 73.2 (71.5 for males and
74.2 for females).
There has been a decline in the total growth rates since 2001 indicating continued outflow of
Samoans overseas. This outflow has resulted in a loss of labour in all sectors and an increase
in remittances. Regionally, North West Upolu has the greatest growth at 1.3 percent (the sale
of government land in Vaitele, Vailele and other surrounding villages was a major reason for
this growth) and Apia Urban Area (APA) had the only declining growth¹⁰
Most of the population is rural with only 21 percent being urban. Rural-urban migration,
especially in NWU, has been due in part to the continuous centralisation of social and
economic services (schools, health facilities, shopping, government and private employment
opportunities). More efficient transport has also facilitated migration.
In 2006 only 2 percent of the population had never been to school. The majority had achieved
education a secondary level education (55 percent) with 11 percent achieving tertiary level
education. For the age group of 15 - 24, reading literacy in Samoan is 89 percent for males
and 92 percent for females, and in English it is 71 percent for males and 81 percent for females.
Differences between regions are not available.
8
Report of the Population and Housing Census 2006
9
Confirmed by Taimalietane Matatumua, Senior Policy Officer, MAF
10 The four regions are Apia Urban Areas (AUA), North West Upolu (NWU), Rest of Upolu (ROU) and Savaii. There
are 48 districts in Samoa.
69
The census indicates that for persons 15 years and older 32 percent of females are actively
involved in economic activities and 65 percent mainly involved in non-economic activities.
The reverse was the case for males: 68 percent are actively involved and 35 percent are mainly
involved in non-economic activities. This pattern reflects the traditional Samoan household
where men deal mostly with the heavier work outside the house such as farming, planting and
fishing and income generating activities whereas women are more involved in less physical
work and household work.
Table 1 shows trends in the economically active population in the 2006 and 2001 censuses.
Table 1: Economically active population Persons 15+ 2006 & 2001
2006
2001
Economically Active
Total
%
Total
%
Paid job
28179
51.6
24468
46.2
Subsistence for sale
1219
2.2
1831
3.5
Subsistence for family use
15652
28.6
23408
44.2
Subsistence for sale & family use
8878
16.2
612
1.2
Looking for work
707
1.3
2620
5.0
Total
54,635¹¹
100
52,954
100
Between 2001 and 2006 the percentage of people in paid work increased by approximately 5
percent, and the percentage of those working in subsistence agriculture for family use
decreased by 15 percent. However, a 15 percent increase was seen in people working in
subsistence agriculture for family use and to earn money. Of those in paid work in 2006, 60
percent were female. It is of note that only 7 percent of females worked in subsistence
agriculture for sale and family use compared to 21 percent of males. Most of the unemployed
are young male adults aged 15 to 34.
11 The total population of Persons 15+ by main activity for 2006 was 109,804 (54,635 Economically Active, 52,715
Not Economically Active and 2,454 Not Stated). From Report of the Population and Housing Census 2006
70
The rate of unemployment also dropped between 2001 and 2006. This may have been fuelled
by preparation for the South Pacific Games which were held in 2007 which would have
included construction of infrastructure and the growth in the service industry.
Concerning the basic needs poverty line, the 2008 Household Income and Expenditure Survey
(HIES) indicated that 20.1 percent of Samoans live below the poverty line an increase from
19.1 percent in 2002. The Government of Samoa (GoS) and United Nations Development
Program (UNDP) estimate that, had the food basket (on which the basic need poverty line is
based as well as the non food basket) been costed in the fourth quarter of 2008 instead of the
first quarter (the fourth quarter being a lower point in the worldwide economic downturn), its
cost would have been 25 percent higher thus raising the percentage to some 34 percent 12
Most deaths are due to non-communicable diseases such as diabetes, hypertension, heart
problems, and smoking. There is a greater chance that non-communicable diseases can be
prevented through public health campaigns targeted to the young.
3.2 Agriculture in Samoa
The Agriculture Survey (2005) 13 indicated that 75 percent of the households in Samoa were
active in agriculture. Savaii was the most agriculturally active region with 96 percent
agriculturally active households and AUA the least agriculturally active with 69 percent
agriculturally active households. Households that were agriculturally active had a holding 14
of an average of 2 parcels per holding in each region except for Savaii which had an average of
3.
Use of major crops
Sale and consumption of major crops by 17,962 agriculturally active households is as follows:
12 From Mr Zijp's report (and Samoa Bureau of Statistics and UNDP Pacific Centre (2009) Samoa: A Report on the
Estimation of Basic Needs Poverty Lines, and the Incidence and Characteristics of Hardship and Poverty: Analysis
of the 2008 Household Income and Expenditure Survey)
13
2005 Agriculture Survey, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries and Ministry of Finance, Government of Samoa.
Note that the agricultural survey data is for 2005 whereas the population Census data discussed in chapter 2 is
for 2006.
14
An agricultural holding is an economic unit of agricultural production under single management without regard
to title, legal form or size. Single management may be by an individual or household, jointly by individuals or
households by a clan, tribe or a juridical person such as a corporation, co-operative or government agency. The
holding may consist of parcels not in the same locality provided they share the same production means such as
labour, farm, buildings or machinery (2005 Agriculture Survey, Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries and Ministry
of Finance, Government of Samoa)
71
Coconuts
Consumption:
The average weekly consumption per household of coconuts (matured and young)
was 45 - similar to 2004 results
Sales:
Approximately 2 percent sold 326,000 drinking nuts with an estimated value of
SAT$917,000
6 percent sold 4,260,000 matured coconuts with an estimated value of
SAT$917,000, and
Only 0.3 percent sold copra with an estimated value of SAT$173,000.
Cocoa
Consumption:
Per household consumption decreased from 40 percent in 2004 to 33 percent in
2005. However average weekly consumption per household increased from 3 to 5
packets during the same period. AUA had the lowest weekly consumption per
household with only 2 packets compared to NWU with 6 packets
Sales:
6 percent sold cocoa with an estimated value of SAT$1,330,000. NWU accounted
for 52 percent of the cocoa sold and AUA only 1 percent.
Bananas
Consumption:
Bananas are a major food item in Samoa. 80 percent or all households consumed
bananas with an average weekly consumption of 3 bunches. The 2004 survey
results were similar with 78 percent of all households consuming bananas but with
only an average weekly consumption of 2 bunches
Sales:
In contrast, only 16 percent of agriculturally active households sold bananas with
an estimated value of sale of SAT$3,160,000. Of the volume sold, 46 percent was
from NWU and only 10 percent from AUA.
72
Taro
Consumption:
Approximately 62 percent of all households consumed taro, the percent showing no
significant change from the previous year's survey results
Sales:
Some 31 percent sold taro with an estimated value of SAT$18, 456,000.
Taro palagi
Consumption:
Only 8 percent consumed taro palagi with an average weekly consumption of 9
baskets. The majority of households consuming taro palagi were in NWU (810)
and the least in AUA (148)
Sales:
About 2 percent sold taro palagi with an estimated value of sale of SAT$295,000.
ROU accounted for 35 percent of sales and AUA 5 percent.
Taamu
Consumption:
Some 43 percent consumed taamu which was a similar result with the 2004 survey
Sales:
Some 9 percent sold 288,000 tammu with an estimated value of SAT$416,000.
Savaii sold 52.5 percent, NWU 27.5 percent and the rest in ROU.
73
Figure 2: Households Consumption and Sale of Major Crops
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Coconuts
Coconuts
Cocoa
Bananas
Taro
Taro palagi
Taamu
(drinking)
% HH Consumed
% HH Sold
Annual data is available on major crops only.
Households with livestock and poultry
The raising, usage and rearing of livestock and poultry by households is as follows
Cattle
Household percentages:
(16 percent had cows, 10 percent heifers, 9 percent bulls, 5 percent steers and 10
percent calves).
Raising:
Of the 49,000 cattle in Samoa:
44 percent were from ROU
26 percent from Savaii
17 percent from NWU
13 percent AUA. The numbers raised was a significant increase of 75 percent
since 1999.
Usage:
Of the 12,300 slaughtered
65 percent were for fa'alavelave
34 percent for sale
1 percent consumption. Also 1,700 live cattle were sold.
74
Rearing:
The main system is 'enclosed own' by 57 percent, tethering by 33 percent, free
range by 4 percent and 'enclosed other' 6 percent.
Figure 3: Percentage cattle raised by region
AUA,
13%
NWU,
ROU,
17%
44%
Savaii,
26%
Figure 4: Livestock use
200000
150000
100000
Cows
Pigs
50000
Chickens
0
TOTAL
Sale
fa
Pigs
Household percentages:
51 percent had sows, 36 percent had breeding boars, 28 percent had gilts, 24 percent
had barrows, 48 percent had piglets)
75
Raising:
258,000 were raised (an increase of 25 percent over the last year):
54 percent were piglets
17 percent SOWS
12 percent breeding boars
9 percent barrows
8 percent gilts
Usage:
Of the 88,700 pigs slaughtered:
50 percent were for fa'alavelave
41 percent consumption
9 percent for sale. Also 8,200 live pigs were sold compared with 4,200 the
previous year.
Rearing:
The main system was 'free range' by 53 percent and the remainder 'enclosed own'.
The main local feed for pigs is 95 percent coconuts.
Chickens
Households:
16,400 households (69 percent)
Raising:
497,000 were raised (an increase of 8 percent over the last year).
Usage:
Of the 233,800 chickens slaughtered
59 percent were for consumption
34 percent for fa'alavelave
7 percent were sold. Also 17,000 live chickens were sold compared to 8,800 in
2004.
Rearing:
Of the 16,400 households that raised chickens
98 percent were 'free range'
76
2 percent 'enclosed own'. The main local feed was 85 percent coconut meal
followed by 8 percent not fed.
Bees
The 40 bee keepers in Samoa supply the local market 100 percent through the bee
keepers association. Little work is required, for raising bees and making honey and
there are few costs, no transport is required and payment is immediate and given at the
gate 3-4 times annually. These factors make it attractive to bee keepers / farmers as a
part time or full time occupation.
Ten hives (which is a typical number for a bee keeper) require 4-5 days of work yearly
and provide an annual income of US$900 for 450 kilos of honey. Buckets are provided
to the bee keeper to collect the honey and a truck collects the honey 3-4 times (usually
between June and December) annually. Costs include the hives and sometimes sugar.
Honey can be produced alongside farming such as raising chickens.
The project would provide the opportunity for agricultural households to increase numbers in
livestock and poultry already raised in Samoa and to improve animal husbandry practices.
1. SAMOAN SOCIETY
4.1 Family and village structure
The family, 'iaga, and the village, nu'u, are key social units in Samoan society.
The Samoan family refers to an extended family which may include three or four generations
living in close proximity. It is the primary unit through which the Samoan way of life, fa'
Samoa, operates. In this family structure each member knows their roles, expectations and
duties. By carrying out their duties, they will be the beneficiaries in the long term. The family
'is a source of sustenance, certainty and comfort in times of social or economic difficulty
However, family expectations and obligations can be high and conflicts may emerge between
the younger more western educated generation and their elders.
The village, nu'u, is the secondary unit which mantles several primary units. A village is made
up of chiefs, who govern the village, and untitled men and women. Untitled members in a
village are in one of four groups; the wives of matai (faletua), school aged children (tamaiti),
untitled men (collectively aumaga), and women (aualuma - which also refers to the women's
committee). The latter two groups are the workers in the village. There are 362 villages in
Samoa and each village takes great pride in maintaining its identity and distinctive history.
15 Samoa Pacific Pride, by Graeme Lay, Tony Murrow & Malama Meleisea, 2000 Pasifika Press Ltd
77
Loyalty to one's village and family are 'an almost sacred obligation' 16 Groups of villages
form districts, itu malo, connoting an alliance.
Each village has a sacred central open space, malae, which is the shared property of the nu'u.
Traditional Samoan houses, fale, and palagi style houses are located around the central open
space. The council meeting house, fale talimalo, predominates, by its presence usually in the
middle and raised higher than other buildings. Most villages are located by the sea.
The men do the more physically challenging work including scaling trees for coconuts, cassava
planting and harvesting, and slaughtering cattle. The women tend the smaller animals, do
gardening, serve food and provide for guests, and support health and education initiatives as
well as looking after the family. When there are village events such as planting of crops, it is
the untitled men and women who do the work while the matai supervise and administer.
Great importance is placed on the group and its dignity and achievement rather than the
individual. This value is deeply rooted in the Samoan way of life.
4.2 Matai and village council
Each family has at least one leader, matai, as its head which is usually a male and may also be
a female. A matai is appointed through inheritance and family. The matai works for the
family to provide maximum benefits for all the members of the family. Matai command
respect and are addressed by their titles of Afioga, Susuga and Tofa depending on their type and
hierarchy. In 2006 only 9 percent of the total population reported to be Matai in their
households (80 percent were male and 20 percent female) 17
There are two types of matai; ali'i or chief matai who inherit their titles and form a kind of
aristocracy, and tulafale or orator matai who achieve similar status by performing important
administrative roles and excellence as orators. The tulafale carries a fue made of sennit when
speaking officially.
The matai is responsible for directing use of family land and other assets belonging to the
family. He must honour the title he bears and the people he represents by his behaviour.
Untitled people render services in return for his leadership.
18
Matai are responsible for enforcement of village law and punishment of family members who
have violated social codes. Transgressions include violence, disobedience of family orders,
adultery, drunkenness and manslaughter and punishment include onerous tasks for minor
16
Samoa Pacific Pride, by Graeme Lay, Tony Murrow & Malama Meleisea, 2000 Pasifika Press Ltd
17
Report of the Population and Housing Census 2006
18
1999 Census of Agriculture Report
78
offences and extreme humiliation for serious offences. Generally most offences are dealt with
at village level.
Only Matai can run for parliament. In 1990 voting was extended to all adult Samoans however
the requirement remained that only matai could stand for parliament.
Each matai represents the family at village council, fono, meetings. The council of matai
governs its village and makes decisions on all village matters beyond those made by each
family. To make changes in a village, the most powerful matai needs to win the full support of
the other matai of that village. In the village the chiefs make, interpret and implement the law.
Matai have monthly meetings and as required. If anything needs to be done in the community
it is done through the chiefs. It is through the chiefs a formal relationship can be established.
The village mayor, pulenu'u, a matai and on the village council, is the point of contact to link
the project with villages.
Matai are registered at the Land Titles Court. Bestowing so many matai titles is a current
concern, in part because it makes decision making about development on customary land
difficult. Some matai have stopped development and disagreement has sometimes resulted in a
lengthy court case.
4.3 Women's committees and other organisations
Each village has a women's committee which meets monthly and at other times as required.
The women's committee is very active in each village.
Each committee has a representative and representatives meet monthly with the Women's
Division (WD) of the Ministry of Women Community and Social Development (MWCSD).
Each representative is paid by government but selected by the village. The representative acts
as a liaison between the village and government. There are 105 representatives in Upolu and
86 in Savaii. Meetings are an opportunity for participants to share information on a wide range
of topics.
MWCSD and Non-government organisations (NGO's) are very active in promoting healthy
villages, healthy families and healthy eating. In addition, the health sector has undertaken
several programmes to help improve the quality and longevity of life.
WD has several social and economic programs underway in villages. They include fine mats,
vegetable programs and a Family, Health, Safety and Wellbeing program which started in 1998
(components include organic vegetable gardens, fencing pigs, improving sanitary conditions,
fencing chickens and other livestock and access to water.
79
Other activities at the village level include small grants (from WD and UNDP), micro-finance,
and nutrition. Some of the grants programs are group-based (applicants must apply as part of a
group).
The Crops Division of MAF train WD members on growing fruit and vegetables. WD
members then go and work directly with families in villages. The Livestock Division of MAF,
however, does not work with WD but rather through Internal Affairs (IA) and the village
mayors.
WIBDI is very active in villages and is driving organic farming. Through the revival of the
partnership with WIBDI, WD hopes to play a much more facilitative role in the Fruit and
Garden strategy.
4.4 Cultural practices
Food has cultural significance in Samoa. Food is distributed at ceremonies is accordance with
social position, for example, a person of rank must be given taro and is often given a portion of
cattle or pig.
At a function such as a funeral, wedding, house warming and the bestowal of a matai title,
fa alavelave (a traditional ceremony characterized by reciprocal gift-giving), fine mats and
monetary gifts are given to the host family. Out of respect and custom, gifts are given in
return. For matai and church ministers, gift giving often includes portions of cattle. The
higher the status the more portions are given. The matai and church ministers take the gifts
home and may divide them among family or church members. Alternatively, they may sell the
meat. In the past pigs were the highly prized gifts, however cattle are now highly prized.
People rely on remittances to help fund fa 'alavelave occasions.
Farmers earn more from the fa alavelave market than from selling to supermarkets. The
fa alavelave meat is sold at the farm gate where carcasses or live animals are sold. The price
is negotiated between buyer and seller depending on the size or type of animal.
The commercial market has to be worthwhile for farming families to enter or extend in that
market. Decisions relating to fa alavelave are made by families in the village setting and not by
government.
4.5 Land ownership and tenure
In Samoa, approximately 80 percent of the land is customary land and owned by the family
over which the matai has authority.
80
In 2006, 65 percent of households were living on customary land and 25 percent lived on
freehold land. The rest lived on other types of land tenure¹⁹. The four regions of Samoa have
markedly different percentages of people living on customary land. Savaii has 93 percent,
ROU 90 percent, NWU 54 percent and AUA 24 percent. No households in Savaii and ROU
lived on leased or Government land.
Approximately 91 percent of crop cultivation takes place on customary land with a small
percentage on freehold land and a smaller percentage on leased land% 20
Figure 5: % of population living on customary land by region
AUA
NWU
ROU
Savaii
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
4.6 Facilities and services available
Facilities and services available to households are as follows.
Concerning the main source of water supply for households, 80 percent of the four regions
have access to tap water, however it is unclear if the source is reliable. There is still a large
percentage of the population without metered water (which is purified and cleaner than tap
water), for example, 7 districts had 95-100 percent of their households without metered water
while only 9 districts had less than 12 percent of households without metered water or 88
percent with metered water.
For drinking water, 48 percent had drinking water from metered water, 36 percent used tap
water (it needs to be boiled for drinking), 8 percent used stored rainwater, 5 percent bought
purified water and 2.5 percent used well or spring water.
Around 97 percent of Samoa had access to an electrical supply of power with only a small
percentage using benzene and kerosene for lighting.
19
Leased land 4 percent, government land 1 percent, church land 4 percent, employer's land 1 percent and not
stated .1 percent (Report of the Population and Housing Census 2006)
20
Refer to Dr Hanemann's report for details.
81
Around 81 percent of households used firewood for cooking (often in combination with
another source such as gas, kerosene or electricity).
Concerning toilet facilities, 77 percent of households had a flush toilet. The main reason for
those who didn't have one was due to lack of a reliable water supply for flushing. However
there has been an increase of 15 percent of households with flush toilets since 2001.
Table 2 indicates household items by status of ownership in all regions.
Table 2: Households by selected household items 2006
TOTAL
AUA
NWU
ROU
SAVAII
23813 hh*
5183 hh
7581 hh
5443 hh
5606 hh
Ownership and status of item
%
%
%
%
%
Land telephone line
Yes operating
42.8
55.6
41.9
34.9
39.9
Cellular phone
Yes operating
47.8
82.0
62.5
24.1
19.1
Computer
Yes operating
9.7
22.8
9.8
3.7
3.0
Radio
Yes operating
89.1
92.6
90.0
87.2
86.5
Television
Yes operating
61.9
74.2
63.8
55.6
54.1
* Number of households for Samoa and each region
The table highlights the lower percentages of households in rural areas that had items that were
operating. However, the selected household items indicate the appropriate way to let people
know about the project in the information campaign. As well as direct communication, radio
and TV will be very important.
4.7 Roles in agricultural practices
The following comments provide snapshots into men and women's roles in agricultural
practices.
Within each village men's group have guidelines and rules for usage of customary land. For
example, every untitled man may be required to plant 2 acres of a particular staple crop such as
82
taro. Afterwards the lands are inspected and if they don't comply the men are usually
penalized. This encourages them to work.
Almost all villages in rural areas have programs for men including school leavers and those
unemployed. The same applies for young women. Within villages there are examples of
communal land used for communal projects. Vegetables grown in these programs are not for
sale and are distributed among families.
Cattle are mainly men's work. Women generally don't slaughter cattle or pigs but they may
kill chickens. Women rear calves near the home but as the cattle grow bigger they are moved
away from the home. Women are included in decision-making about cattle including the
distribution of meat.
Pigs are reared in low lands, closer to houses and roads. Young family members mainly look
after the pigs in rural areas with men feeding and killing pigs.
Women provide /arrange the following for pigs and chickens
Food, feed and rearing
Marketing and selling of pigs and chickens for fa 'alavelave, and to hotels, catering
firms, restaurants and families.
An advisory role to their husbands to fence pigs, and fence roaming pigs and piglets
(pigs are to be fenced now under Planning Urban Management Agency (PUMA)
requirements).
Crops advisory extension officers have training programs at the village level and get good
feedback from the trainee groups. As a result some farm work has been extended.
While there are some good examples of successful village-based agricultural ventures (such as
Savaia's taro village selling program run by a Village Development Committee) the following
are challenges that may be faced in developing commercially-oriented village-based models: 21
Village groups are perceived of as suitable only for community projects that have no
cash benefits
Village groups may not be well-organized leading to disputes within leadership bodies.
Unresolved disputes within the project may leak into the project, resulting in dissolution
of the project
Numbers of cattle are said to make a cattle farmer in that they give prestige. A farmer with a
large herd has around 500 cattle, and a farmer with a small herd would have 7 to 15 cattle.
Some farmers have one cow per 5 acres as a way to manage resources.
21 As identified by WD, IA and WIBDI
83
BIBLIOGRAPHY
2010 CIA Word Fact Book
2009 Fruit & Vegetables Sector Strategy for Samoa - All ACP Commodities Programme
Pacific Region Strategic Context and Rationale, Apia, Samoa
Drinkwater, S Levine, P & Lotti, E 2006 Labour Market and Investment Effects of
Remittances, Department of Economics Discussion Papers 1906, Department of Economics,
University of Surrey.
Hanemann, LP - 2010 - Strengthening the Performance of Samoa's Fruit and Vegetable
Sector
Government of Samoa - 2008 Strategy for the Development of Samoa 2008 - 2012 Ministry of
Finance
Government of Samoa - 2006 Report on the Population and Housing Census 2006 - Aus AID,
Samoa Bureau of Statistics, Ministry of Finance
Government of Samoa -2005 Agriculture Survey - Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries,
Ministry of Finance
Government of Samoa - 2001 Report on the Population and Housing Census 2001 - AusAID,
Statistical Services, Ministry of Finance
Government of Samoa - 2000 Agriculture Survey - Department of Statistics
Government of Samoa - 1999 Census of Agriculture Report - Department of Statistics, Ministry
of Agriculture
Government of Samoa - Western Samoa The Land - Its People The Way of Life - Department
of Economic Development
Rundgren, Gunner - 2010
Developing the Organic Sector In Samoa - Proposal for the
World Bank for the Samoa Agriculture Competitive
Enhancement Project
World Bank - Strategic Context and Rationale
84
ANNEX 9 - Minutes of Consultations
MEETING WITH MAYORS OF "SEVERELY AFFECTED" VILLAGES
Members attended: Peseta Frank Fong(ACEO MAF), Lemalama Taaloga Faasalaina(ACEO
MWCSD), Unasa Iulia Petelo(Project Coordinator -FAO), Peter McCrea (Project Consultant),
30 Village Mayors and Kitiona Tugaga( MAF- Senior policy Officer/Secretary)
Welcome Remark
Lemalama Taaloga- welcomes all the participants and thanks them for making their time
available to this important meeting.
Matters discussed in the meeting
Peseta - Addresses that the project focuses on families affected by the Cyclone especially with
regards to their farms (crops and livestock) and fishing equipments. Also mentioned two levels.
1. Subsistence farmers - use of vouchers given out to every farmer to purchase tools
(materials) needed to upgrade farm to the previous stage before the cyclone.
2. Commercial farmers - entitle to 70% from the project with farmer responsible for the
30% equity. A maximum of $7,000.00 for this category and terms and conditions apply.
Also stated the importance of a list of households (beneficiaries) affected to be presented by
the Pulenu'u. This list will be posted on all the main churches of the villages involved and then
later on to be published in the local newspaper.
Mayor 1- Mentioned the destruction of his coconuts and cocoa that is under the Stimulus
Package.
Mayor 2- Asks for the name of the Project and where exactly were from?
Peseta - Firstly apologized and then answered. We're from the Ministry of Agriculture and
Fisheries that is working in collaboration with MWCSD to execute the Cyclone Response
Project. After translating the Project name, also explained the eligibility issues where if you
don't have a farm then you are not entitled. Further, five signatures are needed for verification
(i.e.) Village mayor, village youth rep, village woman's group rep etc. Then asked if the village
mayors could fill in the list of households affected on the form given out.
Lemalama - commented that the list was already made from late last year (Dec) and also
sometime this year.
Mayor 3- comment that the list should be renewed since there are new members in their
community and also some have died, thus, should be removed from the list.
85
Mayor 4 - commented on the language the form is written (i.e.) English
Peseta - Translated the columns in the table.
Mayor 5 - Commented, if he is from a family that has seven farms, would they be entitle to
seven vouchers?
Peseta - No. if a family has seven farms and only has one kitchen (umukuka), then they are
still regarded as one household because whatever happens in the different farms will always
end up to this one kitchen (umukuka).
Mayor 6 - Are we going to use the list we did last year?
Peseta - For subsistence farming, we can't go back to that list. Only for Commercial farms
because there are evidences and information on what was destroyed and what's left. Also
stresses the need for the mayors to have all the households that were affected in their final list
to avoid complains and also the effectiveness of the project.
Mayor 7 - What about cows that were drifted away from flooding? Should that be included?
Peseta - Depending on the evidence and report given to support it.
Mayor 8 - So if every household gets $2000. Is it really up to us on how we spend it on
agricultural tools..etc??
Peseta - Yes
Mayor 8 - Oh that's really good.
Peseta - Explained that commercial farms are entitled to more money but that depends on the
report given. Again stresses the need for the mayors to have all the households that were
affected in their final list to avoid complains and also the effectiveness of the project.
Mayor 9 - Questions the list and which households should be on the list?
Lemalama - Explains that if the name is on the old list, just copy it to the new list and add the
new ones.
Mayor 10 - Said the damage on his farm at Aleisa was assessed last year and it's still waiting
for the fund. Also suggested that since the project is about assisting farmers whose crops are
affected by the cyclone, then what about households who only has 3 to 4 bananas growing on
their ¼ acre of land. If that's the case then pretty much everyone should be entitled to the
funding.
86
Peseta - No. That is not the case. The project is only responsible mainly for households who
truly rely on their farms for a living. It does not include households that have people working
and do not rely much on the farm.
Mayor 11 - What number of cows should you have to be entitled to the project fund?
Peseta - It's not so much about the number of cows you have but the cost of the damage done
is what the project is responsible for. Also suggested when will the list be finalized?
Lemalama - Asked all the village mayors present that the sooner we get the list, the sooner it is
for them to get assistance from the project. Then suggested what about Wednesday on the
following week? And everyone agreed.
Mayor 12 - Say the list is finalized, when are we going to receive assistance from the project?
Peseta - Discussed with Peter McCrea the commonly raised issue of WHEN the assistance
will actually be disbursed. He responded that if we do get the list and everything goes as
planned, the vouchers should be given out by November 2013 the latest.
Other matters
Dates finalized for the visit.
Wednesday
Time
Mayor's Phone number
Satalo
11 am
751 8107
Falealili Matautu
2 pm
772 7995
Thursday
Time
Mayor's Phone number
Siumu
1 1am
722 6524
Vaie'e
2 pm
Friday
Time
Mayor's Phone number
Aleisa
11 am
87
AGRICULTURE & FISHERIES CYCLONE RESPONSE PROJECT (AFCRP)
Meeting with Mayors of Severely Affected Areas, 2ⁿᵈ August 2013 @ 9:00am at the
MWCSD Conference Room
Present:
Peseta Frank Fong (ACEO-PPCD, MAF) - Chairman
Peter McCrea - World Bank Consultant
Joyce Samuelu Ah Leong (ACEO-Fisheries, MAF)
Village Mayors
Silupe & Agnes (PPCD staff) - PPCD Staff
Opening Prayer - Mayor
The Chair welcomes and thanked all members present.
Feedback from Mayors
One of the mayors inquires the chairman and the ministry about the amount that each
household should receive from the World Bank contribution?
The chairman responded and clearly clarifies the voucher system for subsistence farmers
and assistance for commercial farmers, plus the definition of households.
Another mayor questioned why commercial farmers receive a higher amount of assistance
whereas most of subsistence farmers are paying hired labour to work their farms?
Chairman further elaborated the differences between a subsistence farm and a commercial
farm. Subsistence farmers grow or farm mainly for family consumption whereas
commercial farmers aims for the local and export market.
One mayor asked whether the assistance is for farmers or fishers only.
The chair stated that the assistance covers all farmers and fishers in the severely and
moderately damaged areas.
Another question raised is the timing of the implementation of the project.
Chairman explained that the project timeframe is two years, and the ministry has started
the consultations with the affected villages, the handing out of vouchers depends on the
finalization of lists of beneficiaries.
The meeting closed at 11:30am and the Chair again thanked all the participants for making
their time available to this important meeting and urged the support of the mayors for the ease
of implementation of this recovery project.
88
Consultation with the Severely Affected Villages and Households
for the Cyclone Evan Response Project
Villages Involved: Matautu-Falealili, Satalo-Falealili, Siumu, Vaiee-Safata and Aleisa Sasae.
Welcome Remark
Peseta welcomes everyone attending followed by a brief summary of the main purpose of the
project and how every severely and moderately affected household benefit from this assistance.
Summary of Issues:
1. Most participants were unclear regarding the process of selecting the beneficiaries and
how MAF would select and identify the affected households.
Peseta elaborated every terms and criteria of above matter, given that the
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries has to follow the old definition of
Household which is "1 Kitchen = 1 Households", with given examples.
He also reminded that this project would only benefit those households that
were engaged and relied on farming and fishing for food as well as those who
operated livestock farm before the cyclone.
These selected beneficiaries would receive a voucher in any approved amount
later on from the WB to purchase tools/equipment that would assist them in the
rehabilitation process of their affected farms.
2. Another common issue that was always raised was how would the project response for
those Households that owned both a Crop farm and livestock farm? Would the project
provide an extra voucher for those cases?
Peseta responded that each affected household will be eligible for one (1)
voucher to cover both the crop farming tools and building materials for livestock
farms.
Pese also added on that there is another way of getting an extra fund apart from
the voucher, however only the Commercial farmers would be entitled to apply
for those funds given that they can provide the 30% of the proposed amount and
the project would fund the other 70%.
One of the team members gave advice to all the attendees that it is better to
accept the voucher instead of applying for the above extra fund, knowing that it
would be a very difficult process and paper works in order to get it.
89
3. From the women's perspective, they were so concern on how they (households) will
repay these vouchers later on.
Peseta and the team simply stated that all benefits in this mission are for free,
and there is no need to pay back anything.
4. Some participants were concerned on what sort of tools and farming equipment that
they can purchase using the voucher.
Peseta responded that the project would provide a list of all tools and equipment
that are allowed to purchase under the voucher.
He also reminded that beneficiaries are not be acceptable to obtain any sort of
materials that are not use for agriculture and fishing purposes under these
vouchers.
5. One of the main issues being raised was how the project would be so sure that the list
from village mayors is accurate and completely correct.
Peseta explained that all lists would get back again to the village mayors to stick
on churches notice board and also posted on the Savali Newspaper in order for
everyone's eyes.
The consultations started on the 31ˢᵗ of July and finished on the 2ⁿᵈ of August, and our team
leader again thanked all the participants for making their time available to this important
session for the start of this recovery project.
90
List of People Consulted for the Environmental Assessment
List of people interviewed
NOTE: The ESMF for the AFCRP is based on the SACEP ESMF. It builds on and extends the
scope of the SACEP ESMF to include fisheries subprojects which is outside the scope of
SACEP. The SACEP ESMF was developed in consultations with the following individuals and
organizations.
Government Organizations
Name
Institution
Position
Taito Dr. Tumaalii
SROS
Chief Executive Officer
Czavina Iese
MNREM
Senior Officer, Environment&
Conservation Division
Fonoiava Sealiitu Sesega
MAF
Chief Executive Officer
Lafaele Lameko
MAF
SACEP Project Coordinator
Philip Tuivavalagi
MAF
Principal Officer, Crop
Protection, Nu'u
Fuifatu Billy Enosa
MAF
Senior Research Officer, Crop
Protection, Nu'u
Faalelei Laiti
MAF
Research Officer, Fruit fly
Research, Nu'u
Aleni Uelese
MAF
Senior Officer, Crop Protection, Nu'u
Juvita Tone
MAF
Research Officer, Crop
Protection, Nu'u
Parate Matalavea
MAF
Principal Research Officer, Crop
Research, Nu'u
Mike Furlong
MAF
Australian Volunteer, Crop
Protection, Nuu
Ofeira Vitoria Faasau
MNREM
Acting ACEO, PUMA & Principal
Sustainable
Development Officer
Tuulima Laiti
MAF
Project Coordinator,
ICCRAHSS
Josephine Stowers-Fiu
MNREM
ACEO, Legal Consultant
Lagomauitumua Sunny Seuseu
MNREM
Principal Climate Officer
Ann Rasmussen
MNREM
Project Coordinator, GEF Climate
Change
Pau Ioane
MNREM
Principal Officer, Land
management Division
Tony Tipamaa
MNREM
ACEO, Environment &
Conservation Division
91
Katenia Rasch
MNREM
Senior Chemist & Hazardous
Waste Management Officer, Environment
and Conservation Division
Maiava Pimalolo
MAF
Registrar of Pesticides
(Agrochemicals)
Frank Fong
MAF
ACEO, Policy Planning &
Communication Division
Taimalietane Matatumua
MAF
Senior Policy Officer, PPCD
Pueata Tanielu
MAF
Senior Officer, Crop
Development, Nuu
Sina Moala
MAF
Principal Officer, Livestock
Division
Emele Ainuu
MAF
Principal Officer, Agricultural
Extension
Louise Apelu
Ministry of
ACEO, Women Division
Women,
Fata Alo Fania
MAF
Senior Officer, Nuu
Maulolo Tavita Assistant
Ministry of
CEO
Women,
Non-Government Organizations
Name
Institution
Position
Bruce Russel
Women in
Misiluki Project Advisor
Business
Fiu Mataese Elisara
Ole Siosiomaga
Executive Director
Society
Walter Vermeulen
Matualleoa
Director
Environmental
Bruce Kussel
WIBDI
Canandra Wiles
WIBDI
Organic Rop Development
Officer
Sooalo A. Peters
WIBDI
Technical Officer
Manita Ah San
WIBDI
Project Officer
Adimaimalaga Tafunai
WIBDI
Director
Alatina Ioelu
SBEC
Financial Officer
Tusitina Nuuvali
WIBDI
Project Officer
International Organizations/Universities
Name
Institution
Position
Mareko P. Tofinga
USP
Associate Professor,
Agriculture
Adama A. Ebenebe
USP
Lecturer, Crop Protection
Mohammed Umar
USP
Director, IRETA
David Hunter
USP
Professor, Soil Science
Daya Perera
USP
Soil Laboratory Technician
92
Aru Mathias
FAO
Forestry Officer, Sub-Regional
Office for the Pacific Islands
Peter Murgatroyd
SPREP
IRC Manager, Pacific Environmental
Information Network Coordinator
Ugar Lualupu
USP
University Livestock Supervisor
Michael Furlong
University
Senior Lecturer, School of
of
Biological Sciences (IPM)
Affected, beneficiary, and interested People
List are not attached due to large file size but will be filed in the Project Files
93
ANNEX 10 - Grievance Redress Mechanism for SACEP
NINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FISHERIES
SAMOA
'Samoa Agriculture and Fisheries Cyclone Response Project'
(SAFCRP)
THE GOVERNMENT OF SAMOA
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
ALL GRIEVANCE MATTERS WILL BE TREATED WITH THE UTMOST
CONFIDENTIALITY
1.
The procedure described here applies equally to any aggrieved party
(individual/partnership/association/company/cooperative etc) that has a legitimate
complaint relating to SAFCRP operations.
2.
Complainants may lodge grievances in person or in writing at the main office²² of the
SAFCRP during working hours, 09.00am to 5.00pm from Monday to Friday.
3.
All grievances will be referred to the Environment and Social Safeguards Officer
(ESMO), who will (i) register the grievance into a Grievance Register.
4.
The ESMO will prepare a Complaint Form template that will be filled in based on the
information provided by the Complaint indicating the specific issues being complained
about. The ESMO will fill in the Complaint Form in the presence of a Complainant who
would be lodging a grievance in person and would be properly signed by the
Complainant. If the grievance is lodged in writing, the ESMO would complete the
Complaint Form for such complainant based on the complainant's letter and the
complainant's letter will be attached to the completed Complaint Form.
5.
When a grievance is registered, the Complainant will receive a receipt indicating the
unique case number for the grievance, date on which the grievance was received and
registered.
22 Project Management Unit (PMU), Telephone: +685 22561/22562, e-mail: info@maf.gov.ws, Ministry of
Agriculture and Fisheries (MAF), L4 TATTE Building, Apia, Samoa
94
6.
SAFCRP will acknowledge receipt of complaint by letter within seven (7) days. The
letter would also advice of actions being taken to resolve the grievance received.
7.
The ESMO will undertake to resolve the grievance within five (5) working days and
will inform the Complainant of the result/actions taken as soon as possible. The
complaint will also be informed of the approximate duration for implementation.
8.
If, after five working (5) days no solution is found, the ESMO will then refer the matter
to the PMU. Among the options for consideration would be direct involvement of PMU
in mediation and consultation. If a grievance remains unresolved by the PMU within
another 10 working days, the matter is then referred by the Project Coordinator to the
Project Steering Committee with recommendation of options to be taken. The PSC will
make the final decision on the recommended options and the ESMO will inform the
Complainant in writing.
9.
After resolution of the issue the grievance will then be closed in the SAFCRP
Grievance Register.
10.
The Complainant reserves the right to take the matter to Court if he/she wishes.
11.
Once each month details of grievances received will be transmitted to the Project
Coordination Group (PMU) for consolidation into the SAFCRP Quarterly Report.
12.
Lists of grievances forwarded to the PMU will include:
Name and contact details of the Person/Partnership/Partner etc. lodging the grievance
a. The name of the recorder.
b. A description of the nature of the grievance.
c. The name of the person(s) who dealt with the grievance.
d. Referral of the grievance to the relevant CEO (if that was necessary).
e. Date of referral.
f. Record of corrective actions.
g. Date and format of feedback to the complainant and any subsequent response.
h. Date and details of closure of the grievance.
13.
If complainants feel threatened or compromised, grievances may be lodged
anonymously but will not be considered.
95