Northern Rivers Disaster Adaptation Plan (NR DAP)

NSW Reconstruction Authority, 
NSW State Emergency Service (NSW SES), 
Local councils across seven LGAs, 
National Emergency Management Agency

and 

CSIRO, 
Living Lab Northern Rivers, 
Northern Rivers Flood Risk Management Practitioners group

Introduction

This solution, Northern Rivers Disaster Adaptation Plan (NR DAP) addresses natural catastrophe through public private partnerships in Australia between NSW Reconstruction Authority, NSW State Emergency Service (NSW SES), Local councils across seven LGAs, National Emergency Management Agency, CSIRO, Living Lab Northern Rivers, and Northern Rivers Flood Risk Management Practitioners group. The program was implemented in 2025 and focuses on collaboration, raising awareness, and regulation.

Description

The Northern Rivers Disaster Adaptation Plan (NR DAP) is New South Wales' first regional, multi-hazard Disaster Adaptation Plan. It is a coordinated effort led by the NSW Reconstruction Authority to reduce disaster risk and strengthen adaptive capacity across seven local government areas. The plan integrates climate change and population growth into risk profiling and action planning, involving structured collaboration with councils, communities, emergency services, industry, and technical experts. It is part of the broader Disaster Adaptation Planning program and aligned with the NSW State Disaster Mitigation Plan.

Key Highlights

The NR DAP is the first multi-hazard regional plan in NSW, addressing nine natural hazards. It follows a phased development approach, starting with a foundation DAP that includes early risk-reduction actions and community engagement, followed by a full DAP after options assessment. Unique features include social asset mapping, the first regional flood evacuation model, and the integration of cultural burning and nature-based measures. The plan emphasizes community co-design and engagement, with workshops and surveys to capture community values and priorities.

Results

Cannot be determined.

Contact Information

Organization: NSW Reconstruction Authority (RA), 
Email: NRDAP@reconstruction.nsw.gov.au, 
Contact Number: NIL
, 
Organization: Living Lab Northern Rivers (LLNR), 
Email: livinglabnr@scu.edu.au, 
Contact Number: 02 6626 9188