Resilient Homes Fund (RHF)

Queensland Government, 
Australian Government, 
Queensland Reconstruction Authority (QRA), 
Department of Energy and Public Works/Department of Housing, Local Government, Planning and Public Works, 
Local governments across 39 LGAs

and 

Natural Hazards Research Australia (NHRA), 
University of Queensland

Introduction

This solution, Resilient Homes Fund (RHF) addresses natural catastrophe through public private partnerships in Australia (State of Queensland) between Queensland Government, Australian Government, Queensland Reconstruction Authority (QRA), Department of Energy and Public Works/Department of Housing, Local Government, Planning and Public Works, Local governments across 39 LGAs, Natural Hazards Research Australia (NHRA), and University of Queensland. The program was implemented in 2022 and focuses on collaboration and raising awareness.

Description

The Resilient Homes Fund (RHF) is a Queensland Government initiative, co-funded with the Australian Government, aimed at reducing household flood risk and accelerating recovery for homeowners affected by the 2021–22 Queensland flood events. The fund provides tailored packages for repairing, retrofitting, raising, demolishing, rebuilding, or voluntarily buying back severely flood-affected properties. It operates under the Disaster Recovery Funding Arrangements (DRFA) and involves multiple public agencies and local councils.

Key Highlights

The RHF offers an integrated portfolio of interventions including buy-backs, raising, retrofitting, and demolition/rebuild options, allowing for tailored solutions based on property and household needs. It is supported by a 50:50 cost-sharing model between state and federal governments under DRFA Category D, and includes a Property Level Flood Information Portals Program to enhance risk awareness and inform decision-making.

Results

Nearly 6,400 registrations and 4,950 homeowners engaged by July 2023. Approximately 5,800 floor level surveys completed, with a milestone of 1,000 homes delivered (raise/rebuild/retrofit) by 2025. Works are ongoing and expected to continue until June 2026.

Contact Information

Organization: Queensland Government, 
Email: resilienthomes@epw.qld.gov.au, 
Contact Number: (07) 3007 4485 (select option 2)
, 
Organization: Australian Government, 
Email: resilienthomes@epw.qld.gov.au, 
Contact Number: (07) 3007 4485 (option 2)
, 
Organization: Queensland Reconstruction Authority (QRA), 
Email: info@qra.qld.gov.au, 
Contact Number: (07) 3740 1700
, 
Organization: Department of Energy and Public Works / Department of Housing, Local Government, Planning and Public Works, 
Email: RHF-HardshipRequests@epw.qld.gov.au, 
Contact Number: (07) 3007 4485 (select option 2)
, 
Organization: Local governments across 39 LGAs, 
Email: resilienthomes@epw.qld.gov.au, 
Contact Number: 13 QGOV (13 74 68)