Global Shield engagement (GSSP pipeline) in the Philippines

Philippines Department of Finance (DOF), 
Global Shield Secretariat

and 

Global Shield Solutions Platform (GSSP), 
World Bank, 
Institute for Climate and Sustainable Cities (ICSC)

and 

Frankfurt School of Finance & Management

Introduction

This solution, Global Shield engagement (GSSP pipeline) in the Philippines addresses natural catastrophe through public private partnerships in Philippines between Philippines Department of Finance (DOF), Global Shield Secretariat, Global Shield Solutions Platform (GSSP), World Bank, Institute for Climate and Sustainable Cities (ICSC), and Frankfurt School of Finance & Management. The program was implemented in 2023 and focuses on collaboration and leveraging tech.

Description

The Global Shield engagement in the Philippines is part of the Global Shield Solutions Platform (GSSP) aimed at providing financial protection against climate and disaster risks. It involves the development of pre-arranged finance solutions such as parametric insurance and risk transfer mechanisms to ensure rapid financial disbursement in the event of climate-related disasters. The initiative is part of a broader V20-G7 effort to enhance financial resilience in vulnerable countries.

Key Highlights

The initiative features a multi-donor, impartial platform with two financing vehicles, GSSP and GSFF, offering complementary channels. It emphasizes pre-arranged finance and rapid, rules-based disbursement. The engagement includes a national dialogue process with ~100 stakeholders and aims to leverage private risk capital and insurance-linked securities.

Results

As of the reporting date, no payouts or deployed instruments have been reported for the Philippines under GSSP. However, a national dialogue has been convened, and collaboration is ongoing to craft a proactive CDRFI proposal.

Contact Information

Organization: Global Shield Solutions Platform (GSSP), 
Email: secretariat@globalshield.org, 
Contact Number: Not publicly listed
, 
Organization: World Bank, 
Email: philippines@worldbank.org, 
Contact Number: +632-8465-2500
, 
Organization: Institute for Climate and Sustainable Cities (ICSC), 
Email: info@icsc.ngo, 
Contact Number: +632 8646 9411