World Bank - FYR Macedonia Partnership
Public Disclosure Authorized
Country Program Snapshot
October 2012
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
au3 gog
Public Disclosure Authorized
RECENT ECONOMIC AND SECTORAL
Inflation is stable, but with upward risks.
DEVELOPMENTS
Inflation was markedly lower than a year before,
Growth and External Performance
with an average inflation in the first seven months
of 2012 of 2.3 percent, compared to 4.3 percent
Economic activity has slowed down over the
the same period a year before. However, during
last few quarters amid increased uncertainty
recent months, inflationary pressures have
in the external environment. Following a
increased. A second increase in electricity prices as
relatively mild contraction in 2009 - a result of
of August 2012 coupled with the recent surge in
sound macro fundamentals prior to the crisis and
oil prices will have an upward effect on inflation.
a resilient financial sector - the recovery of
The expected annual inflation is around 2.8
economic activity gradually accelerated reaching 6
percent.
percent in mid-2011 giving hopes of a robust
The external current account deficit remains
growth in the future. However, the renewed
moderate. In 2011, the increased economic
turmoil in the Euro zone took its toll in trade,
capital flows, and impacted domestic demand in
activity, solid exports and strong transfers resulted
the second half of 2011 and growth collapsed
in a current account deficit of 2.7 percent of
bringing the overall growth rate in 2011 to 3.2
GDP. A sluggish economy in the 2012 led to a
percent. The harsh weather conditions in early
widening of the current account deficit. In
addition the capital account balance decreased as a
2012 and the surge in energy prices have further
affected business activity and output contracted by
result of dividend payments of foreign-owned
1.4 percent (y-o-y) in the first quarter of 2012.
companies and intra-company borrowing capital
Even though there was a 12 percent growth of
transfers going abroad. However, private transfers
GDP on a quarterly basis the downward
(standing at 19.5 percent of GDP) constantly
adjustment of the economy on a yearly basis
exceeded the expectations and helped finance a
continued. Industrial production, construction,
substantial part of the deficit. For 2012 the
exports and investments were lower than the same
external current account deficit is expected to
quarter the previous year and output contracted
reach around 4 percent of GDP.
by 0.9 percent (y-o-y).
The financial account decreased compared to
Figure 1: Quarterly Growth of GDP, Exports
2011. As a result of adverse external financing
conditions the Government decreased its foreign
and Imports
borrowing. Direct investments had decreased
8.0
80.0
compared with 2011, but are still expected to
6.0
60.0
reach around 2 percent of GDP. Foreign reserves
40.0
4.0
stood at euro 2.3 billion (about 30 percent of
20.0
2.0
GDP) in July, compared with euro 2.0 billion (29
0.0
0.0
-20.0
percent of GDP) the year before. The coverage of
-2.0
-40.0
prospective imports by reserves improved slightly
-4.0
-60.0
(above 4 months of imports).
Q2.08
Q3.08
Q4.08
Q1.09
Q2.09
Q3.09
Q4.09
Q1.10
Q2.10
Q3.10
Q4.10
Q1.11
Q2.11
Q3.11
Q4.11
Q1.12
Q2.12
Figure 2: Quarterly Foreign Direct
GDP (left axis)
Exports (right axis)
Imports (right axis)
Investments, net
300,0
The prolonged Euro zone crisis took its toll
250,0
on growth expectations. The negative effects,
200,0
already noticeable in the first quarter, continued in
150,0
the second quarter. Both exports and inward
100,0
50,0
investments could suffer if the Euro zone crisis is
FDI, net
0,0
prolonged, dampening growth considerably.
-50,0
Growth estimates for 2012 are between 0.5 and 1
-100,0
percent (downgraded from the previous
-150,0
expectations of 2 percent growth rate). Growth is
Q2.08
Q3.08
Q4.08
Q1.09
Q2.09
Q3.09
Q4.09
Q1.10
Q2.10
Q3.10
Q4.10
Q1.11
Q2.11
Q3.11
Q4.11
Q1.12
Q2.12
expected to pick up somewhat in 2013 on the
back of increased exports, FDI in export-
orientated sectors and some improvement in
domestic demand. Nonetheless, in the current
climate 2013 growth is expected to reach only
around 1.5 percent.
2
Figure 3: Balance of Payments, in % of GDP
larger adjustment in fiscal policies over the next
quarters in order to appropriately manage
1,400
1,200
financing needs. Government is also taking steps
1,000
to improve financial discipline in the public sector.
800
Over the medium-term, the fiscal accounts
600
2008
400
would need to be gradually adjusted as the
2009
200
2010
economy approaches the potential growth
0
2011
rates. According to the Government work
-200
program for 2012 - 2015, the Authorities are
-400
projecting reduced levels of fiscal deficits after
Current
FDI and
Loans, net
Other capital
Reserves
Account
portfolio
2013. Given the volatility of the capital markets
Deficit
inflows, net
and the increased interest rate risks, financing will
remain an issue in the near future. Against this
Fiscal Sector Performance
background, debt sustainability could be tested if
Fiscal policy had to be revised, but continues
the fiscal deficit is not reduced over the medium-
to be prudent. The fiscal deficit was maintained
term or if the current account widened
at 2.5 percent of GDP in 2011. The 2012 budget
significantly.
was based on optimistic revenue and spending
The tax burden will remain modest, with
forecasts resulting from expectations of high
relatively few taxes, moderate tax rates and
growth in 2012. The slowdown in growth in 2012
improving administration. Total revenues, as
has affected revenues. In response, Government
percent of GDP, are projected to slightly increase
adopted in May a Supplemental Budget with
over the medium term as consumption recovers
measures designed to cut expenditure by 4.5
and EU pre-accession funds are used more
percent in nominal terms to maintain the fiscal
efficiently.
deficit target at 2.5 percent of GDP. The main
measures included: (i) a reduction in capital
To support economic growth a shift towards
expenditures, (ii) cuts in goods and services, and
productive investments is expected.
(iii) lower allocations for non-social transfers.
Adjustments are expected on wages and salaries as
Nonetheless the fiscal deficit in the first seven
policies to control the wage-bill are extended
months has already exhausted almost 80 percent
through 2012. Reforms in the social sector should
of the annual plan. The deficit is likely to exceed
reduce leakage and improve targeting of spending.
the original target and come in at close to 4
Ongoing and planned reforms in the health sector
percent in 2012 following a commitment by
(including the full introduction of output-based
Government to settle arrears accumulated over
financing) would increase efficiency in spending.
the last two years. The 2013 budget is being
The generated savings should be directed towards
prepared under the assumption of a more cautious
productive capital spending which is expected to
revenue forecast. In addition, the continued
increase from around 10 percent of total spending
payment of arrears and pension and social benefit
to an average of 15 percent during 2012 - 2015.
increases will put pressure on the deficit. The
Figure 4: Structure of public spending in 2010,
payment of arrears is expected to support
in % of GDP
businesses and stimulate economic activity.
Capital
expeditures;
Wagesand
However, fiscal policy will need to remain
4,5%
allowances;
Interest
5,0%
cautious. The adverse effects of the Euro zone
expeditures;
crisis and slow growth witnessed by main trading
0,7%
Goodsand
partners affected the economy and were reflected
services; 3,7%
Other
in the underperformance of revenues in the first
transfers;
half of 2012. Government debt grew from 27
5,4%
percent at the end of the first quarter to 30
Health
percent of GDP in July. Despite this relatively
spending;
4,6%
Social
moderate debt level compared to international
spending
standards, caution is warranted. Furthermore, the
10,3%
roll-over risks stemming from the repayment of
the euro 175 million Eurobond maturing in
January 2013 remain elevated given the tight
international capital markets and relatively high
spreads on the country's debt. This may require a
3
Monetary policy and Financial Sector
period of strong growth prior to 2009.
Monetary
policy
has
remained
Furthermore, although the impact of the global
accommodative and supporting the exchange
economic crisis was less severe compared with
rate peg. During 2010 and 2011 monetary policy
most countries in the region and the recovery
was loosened, reflecting stable prices and only
gained some momentum, living conditions
moderate external imbalances. In the second
deteriorated in 2009 and 2010 reflecting hardened
quarter of 2012 rates on Central Bank bills were
access to finance and non-performing labor
lowered to 3.75 percent (down from 4 percent),
markets. 2011 and 2012 had not brought any
while policies on reserve requirements and
significant improvements given the stagnant labor
liquidity management were amended to stimulate
markets and the surge in global food prices in the
credit activity. As of January 2012, credit to the
first half of the year. The official unemployment
private sector grew by around 8 percent y-o-y,
rate grew slightly from 31.2% in 2010 to around
while deposits grew by 10 percent, resulting in
31.9% in 2011 ¹. Females in particular remain
further improvement in the loan to deposit ratio.
disadvantaged in the labor markets with an activity
Interest rates continued to decline gradually, with
rate of around 51 percent compared with 78
rates on loans falling to 8 percent.
percent for males. Main characteristics of the poor
include: being unemployed, low education
Despite the Euro zone crisis, the banking
attainment, number of children. To address the
sector appears resilient, but there are some
persistent poverty, the authorities have initiated a
worrying signs. The Capital Adequacy Ratio was
substantial reform of the social protection system
increased in 2012 to 17.4 percent (up from 16.8
(see the Social Policy section below for details).
percent at the end of 2011. However, profitability
However, more meaningful reduction in the
indicators remain below pre-crisis levels with the
poverty rate would require stronger economic
overall Return on Average Assets (ROAA) being
growth as well as policy measures to ensure that
only 0.4 percent in the second quarter of 2012.
growth is inclusive.
There is a divergence in the ROAA during 2012
with the profitability of the big banks increasing
Figure 6: Absolute poverty, % of population
while some of the small banks have negative
30
profitability (and this it is decreasing). Non-
25
performing loans (NPLs) reached 9.9 percent at
the end of 2011 and 10 percent end of June 2012.
20
Still, NPLs remain fully provisioned. With the
15
loan to deposit ratio well below 1 and low external
exposure, banks should be able to support a
10
stronger pick up in credit activity and demand in
5
the future.
0
Figure 5: Total deposits and Credit to Private
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
Sector, in MKD
250,000
Competitveness
200,000
FYR Macedonia is working on improving its
competitiveness by deepening regulatory
150,000
reforms and strengthening the rule of law to
100,000
encourage private investment. Progress has
been made on business environment reform,
50,000
including overhaul of the business registration
0
system, streamlining legislation governing the
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
regulatory regime, simplifying the licensing
Loans to private sector
Deposits
procedures, and increasing efficiencies in filing
taxes. This is reflected in FYR Macedonia's 22ⁿᵈ
place in the Doing Business ranking, the best in
Poverty and Social Inclusion
1
Poverty remains a challenge, especially in the
This is a Labor Force Survey (LFS) measure of
current uncertain economic environment.
unemployment. It is widely acknowledged that the reported
Poverty is rather stagnant in the country. Living
unemployment rate is probably overestimated. Alternative
measures of the unemployment rate (either through using
conditions failed to improve even during the
stricter filters in the LFS or using the HBS) suggest that the
unemployment rate is most likely lower (around 25%).
4
Eastern Europe. However, a number of challenges
consumption. The authorities also want to exploit
remain, such as developing a more competitive
renewable energy sources, starting with hydro-
and export-oriented enterprise sector, improving
power, but also wind, solar and biomass. Other
the transport and energy infrastructure, and
aims include increasing the use of natural gas and
increasing the skills level of the workforce.
reducing the use of electricity in heating buildings.
Improving the country's competitiveness is
one of the main goals of the World Bank
The World Bank supports the energy sector.
program. The World Bank and the Government
The Energy Community of South East Europe
agreed to a series of two development policy loans
(ECSEE) APL 3 has upgraded energy
with a focus on competitiveness. The program is
transmission infrastructure, promoted sound
structured around three sectoral pillars that
energy planning and regulation, reduced power
support the policy actions underway to foster
losses and has increased the stability of the power
private sector development in manufacturing,
system, mainly by strengthening the transmission
agribusiness and trade logistics and a cross-
network. Additional financing for ECSEE APL 3
sectoral pillar that supports new actions to
will support the extension of electricity
transmission interconnection with Serbia. The
improve the efficiency of the labor market and the
supply of relevant skills.
ongoing GEF Sustainable Energy Project
supports the Government in setting up a large-
The program is underpinned by extensive analytic
scale national program to retrofit public buildings
work conducted by the World Bank over the last
with the aim to improve energy efficiency. It
year. This includes: the Modular Competitiveness
provides capacity building for this national
Assessment (Trade Competitiveness Assessment
program, and at the same time finances energy
and Sectoral Competitiveness Assessment) that is
efficiency measures in schools, kindergartens and
helping the Government better understand
hospitals.
restraints to the competitiveness of its economy;
the Agriculture Public Expenditure Review, which
Social Policy
was requested by the Government to improve the
FYR Macedonia is building an innovative and
targeting of subsidies and achieve strategic goals
well-targeted social safety net. The existing
for agriculture and rural development; and the Job
system performs reasonably well by regional
Creation and Employment Policy Note, which will
standards, but exclusion and leakage exist. The
assess the nature of the deficiencies and
system contains too many programs, with
opportunities that exist in the labor market,
overlapping objectives and beneficiaries. In
including the supply and demand of skills by
addition, coverage of social assistance can be
firms.
strengthened further, as it reaches only 43% of
Energy
individuals in the poorest quintile. Among other
factors, potential beneficiaries are subject to
The Government is concerned about the
extensive means testing which limit the coverage,
growing reliance on imported fossil fuels and
such as lack of proper documentation. This is
high energy intensity. Fossil fuels account for
especially true for Roma. In addition, the system is
more than 80% of energy consumption in FYR
one of the least generous in the region and helps
Macedonia, and an increasing amount of this is
in moderating poverty but not in moving people
imported, including all liquid fuel and natural gas.
out of poverty. Removing non-pension social
In the absence of investment in new energy
transfers would increase poverty by few
sources, this trend will continue as demand grows
percentage points only. Pensions on the other
while domestic production declines. Investing in
hand provide an important buffer against poverty,
the energy sector is important as more than half of
helping around 11% of the population stay above
FYR Macedonian firms indicated in a recent
the absolute poverty line.
survey that electricity supply is a problem. The
Government is committed to improving the
The Government launched a broad reform agenda
power supply and strengthening the country's
to improve the effectiveness of the system.
energy security. Improving energy efficiency is the
Information systems have been upgraded to allow
first step in this direction-FYR Macedonia
better administration, monitoring and use of
consumes very little energy per capita but a high
funds. The Government has also improved its
amount per unit of GDP. An immediate area of
definition and calculation of the benefits, and
opportunity is to improve the efficiency of
revised the terms of eligibility. At the same time, it
residential, commercial and public buildings,
has taken advantage of a relatively well-targeted
which account for up to 50% of the energy
means tested last-resort program-Social
Financial Assistance-to introduce a conditional
5
cash transfer (CCT) program, supported by the
Country
Road Condition
Bank. The CCT program helps to reduce the
% Good
% Fair
% Poor
inter-generational transmission of poverty by
linking benefits to the fulfillment of standards for
Albania
0%
5%
95%
secondary school enrollment and attendance.
BiH
53%
23%
24%
Authorities are considering extending the CCT
Kosovo
20%
6%
74%
benefits to other areas, particularly to improve
outcomes in primary school, including through
FYR Macedonia
29%
42%
27%
programs designed for mothers and children.
Montenegro
18%
33%
50%
Fig 8. Targeting Accuracy of Social Assistance
Serbia
8%
18%
74%
Targeting Accuracy of Social Assistance:
% of Total Benefits Received by Poorest Quintile
All Non-Contributory Transfers)
Source: World Bank Analysis of Household Surveys, Various Years
70%
The Bank program in transport has been
60%
guided by the country's EU accession needs
50%
which required aligning the transport legislation
40%
30%
and improving the condition of the regional and
20%
local road network, bringing it up to the European
10%
0%
standards. The program focused on supporting
/////
////////////
11/11/11
and
///////
////////
11111
the transformation of the Macedonia Railways
company into two new companies, improving
their operational capacity and safety of operations
Transport
and, quite importantly, setting up the conditions
for the use of the railway infrastructure by other
As a landlocked country, FYR Macedonia is
operators by establishing the regulatory
particularly dependent on a well-developed
framework for a multiple operator market in
road and rail network for its economic and
conformity with the European Union legislation.
social development. Key elements of this
network are also part of the Trans-European
Fig. 10 Road Network in FYR Macedonia
transport network (Corridor 10, which goes from
National roads
909 km
Austria to Greece and Turkey, and Corridor 8,
which connects the Durres Port in Albania with
Regional roads
3.781 km
the Black Sea ports in Bulgaria). Since its
Local roads
8.496 km
independence, the main challenges facing the
Total
13.186 km
Government were to reduce the economic
distance to markets and lower the costs of
transportation arising from the poor condition of
Since 2007, the Government embarked on a
the Corridor 10 road and major delays at key
large investment program in the road
border crossing points. These challenges were
network, inviting participation of all IFIs,
addressed in the World Bank program, which
including the World Bank as the lead financier of
focused on (i) improvements of road and rail
the regional and local road network. The neglected
facilities along the Corridor 10; and (ii) trade and
regional and local road network has significantly
transport facilitation actions to ease the movement
deterioration due to poor maintenance. At the
of traffic through key border crossings.
same time, this network was important for such
Fig 9. Secondary/Tertiary Road Network
sectors as agriculture, tourism and rural business
Condition
development. The World Bank is investing in the
rehabilitation of 290 km of regional roads and
about 420 km of local roads. In parallel, it is
supporting institutional strengthening activities to
assist the Agency for State Roads to modernize its
approach to management of the road network.
EBRD and EIB have joined forces to help the
Government finalize the construction of the road
Corridor 10; and EBRD is continuing the rail
rehabilitation on Corridor 10, building on the
Bank's Railways Rehabilitation Project.
6
Despite recently boosted investments (led by
along the northern, western and eastern borders
EBRD and EIB financing), more remains to
of the country.
be done, as the condition of the road network
Fig 11. Trends in livestock in FYR Macedonia
is still worse than that of the neighboring
countries. The ongoing assistance in the regional
Trend in the livestock 2003 2009
1400
road network by the World Bank and EBRD
1200
covers only about 7% of the assessed needs, and
1000
Cattle
800
the rehabilitation program needs to continue to
Sheep
600
Goats
narrow the gap. In addition, many of the country's
400
Pigs
roads are vulnerable to ecological and climate
200
Bees
0
change factors, and interventions are required to
2006
2007
2008
2009
protect them from damage. Strengthening the
capacity of the Agency for State Roads to manage
The production and processing of organic
its network is still at an early stage and capacity
products has increased. Significant growth has
building will need to be deepened and extended to
been recorded in the number of farmers involved
specifically cover public and private sector
in organic production (from 50 in 2008 to 320 in
organizations used by the Agency in implementing
2011). The same is true about the farm land for
its activities.
organic production that increased from 266ha in
2008 to 1.400ha in 2011. This reflects the
country's strong potential in organic agriculture.
The National strategy for agriculture and rural
development for 2007-2013 sets out six main
priorities for the agriculture sector under the
overarching goal of EU accession: (i) increasing
the sector competitiveness; (ii) improving quality
and food safety; (iii) better resource management;
(iv) improving the living conditions in the rural
areas; (v) reforming the regulatory and
institutional framework; and (vi) implementing
Agriculture
institutional reforms in the Ministry of
Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economies.
With an 11% share in the GDP, agriculture is
the third biggest sector in the economy,
following services and industry. In 2011, the
sector provided employment to 18% of the
workforce. Around 41% of the country's land area
is agricultural land, of which one half is arable
land. The land is very fragmented, with an average
size of the private farms of approximately 1.7 ha
and scattered in 1-3 plots. This leads to an
inefficient use of the farm land. The total arable
land has been decreasing, caused by migration of
the population from villages to the cities and
exploitation of the land for urban purposes and
other non- agricultural activities.
The main crops include cereals, industrial crops
(mostly tobacco), fodder, fruit, including grapes,
The Bank's Agriculture Strengthening and
and vegetables (mainly early vegetable crops
Accession Project provides assistance to
production). Agriculture exports include fresh and
strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of
processed vegetables, wine and tobacco.
Agriculture to deliver rural development
Livestock production. Livestock has been
funds, and also supports the agriculture sector
declining over time. The biggest decrease was
in an EU-compliant manner. This includes
registered in sheep breeding, goat breeding and
improving the Ministry's ability to formulate and
poultry farming. Livestock production is mainly
implement effective policies and increasing the
carried out in the hilly and mountainous areas
effectiveness of public expenditures in agriculture.
In addition, it included support to strengthen or
set up institutional structures necessary to access
7
pre-accession assistance and for EU accession.
investment projects, as well as technical assistance
Further, the project aims to strengthen veterinary
grants for sub-project preparation, local capacity
capacity in order to help producers and agro-
building for municipalities and Communal Service
processors meet food safety standards driven by
Enterprises, as well as national level institutional
changing consumer preferences and EU
strengthening.
regulations. Lastly, the project supports
completing the ongoing institutional reform of the
Real Estate Cadastre
irrigation sector that was initiated under the
Macedonia has a model cadastre system in
previous World Bank Irrigation Restructuring and
the region. With the help of the World Bank the
Rehabilitation Project.
Government made great strides in reforming the
real estate cadastre and property registration
Municipal Services
system. The Agency for Real Estate Cadastre has
Improving living standards of the population
transformed itself from a technical organization
requires more effective and efficient public
focused on surveying to a service organization
service delivery. Given the new institutional
focused on customers. The coverage of real estate
realities brought by the unfolding decentralization
cadastre was increased from 43% in 2005 to
process, better performing municipalities are
99.8% in 2011, and the increased efficiency and
crucial to deliver this ambitious agenda.
confidence in the registration system lead to the
Municipalities provide key public services and
increase in using property as a financial asset.
infrastructure for citizens and local businesses.
The Government is focused now on further
Municipal governments control over 7% of public
enhancing the registration and cadastre
spending (a figure that is likely to increase). Local
services by upgrading the national data sets in
authorities influence, shape, and maintain stable
terms of accuracy, completeness, and
inter-ethnic relations at the level closest to
accessibility. The World Bank-financed project is
citizens.
helping the Agency for Real Estate Cadastre with:
Against this backdrop, FYR Macedonia faces
a) digitizing the existing cadastre maps and plans;
the dual challenge of increasing investment in
b) providing this graphical information in a web-
municipal services while tackling weaknesses
based geographic information system to facilitate
in municipal performance and local capacity.
access to information by citizens, the private
To respond to these challenges, municipalities will
sector and the public sector; c) upgrading the
have to make considerable investments in
geodetic reference infrastructure to improve the
strengthening their ability to manage their services
accuracy and efficiency of surveying; and d)
and the funds at their disposal. To take full
support the government to prepare a strategy and
advantage of the opportunities at hand, including
begin implementation of National Spatial Data
resources that accompany EU pre-accession,
Infrastructure. The World Bank investment also
municipal governments will have to fulfill a
supports the Authority for Legal and Property
greater role for which they are insufficiently
Affairs to complete the privatization of urban land
prepared. In doing so, municipalities are facing the
and legalization of illegally constructed buildings,
challenges of weak institutional capacity to
as well as improve its capacity to deal with the
manage their investment responsibilities and the
assets in state property.
communal enterprises, many of which lack
market-based strategies, and are not financially
Catastrophic Risk Insurance
sustainable. The need for reform in the communal
FYR Macedonia is highly prone to
services sector is widely recognized in the country.
earthquakes and floods. The 1963 earthquake
The World Bank-financed Municipal Services
(6.1 MMI) killed more than 1,000 people and
Improvement project focuses on improving
damaged 80% of the building stock in Skopje.
transparency, financial sustainability and
Floods constituted 44% of natural and
delivery of targeted services under the
technological disasters between 1989 and 2006.
responsibility of competitively selected
Moreover, data from the last 20 years shows a
municipalities and their communal service
steady increase in natural disaster incidence, flood
enterprises, such as water supply, sanitation, and
severity, and flood intensity. These frequent
solid waste management, as well as energy
catastrophes represent a significant strain on the
efficiency, urban transport, and other services
Government's financial capacity to assist citizens
under municipal provision. It provides sub-loans
and firms in regaining assets and productive
to municipalities for investments in revenue-
capacity lost due to natural disasters. For example,
generating public services and other high priority
the 1994 floods caused damage worth 77 times the
8
amount allocated by the government for
institutions, improve education, social protection
emergency response that year.
and pensions, build and rehabilitate basic
In order to help mitigate the consequences of
transport and energy infrastructure, and preserve
future catastrophes, FYR Macedonia is
natural and cultural heritage.
joining a regional program for catastrophic
The objective of the World Bank's Country
risk insurance. The program will support
Partnership Strategy with FYR Macedonia for
countries in South East Europe and Caucasus in
fiscal years 2011-2014 is to provide selective and
their efforts to strengthen their insurance sector
targeted financial support and knowledge and
by providing access to reinsurance through joining
advisory services in support of faster, more
Europa Re, a catastrophe reinsurance company, by
inclusive and greener economic growth. Because
financing their membership contributions to the
FYR Macedonia's future growth and development
Facility. Europa Re, in turn, will facilitate the
depends fundamentally on the pace of EU
growth of catastrophe risk insurance markets in
accession, virtually every intervention in the CPS
member countries. The World Bank is financing
is designed to help it prepare for the EU
the participation of FYR Macedonia in the
membership. The current program consists of 7
program.
loans and one grant, totaling US$305 million.
Fig 10. World Bank financed projects by
sector
Social policy
2%
8%
25%
7%
15%
Agriculture
Energy
8%
34%
Cadastre
To help the government cope with the
consequences of the European crisis and to
support the country's economic transition, the
Government and the Bank are preparing two
The program also provides substantial
budget support operations aimed to: (i) strengthen
the sustainability of public finances; (ii) improve
technical assistance, which includes: (i) risk
the performance of social protection; (iii) improve
mapping and modelling for participating
countries; (ii) design and pricing of appropriate
the competitiveness of the economy; and (iv)
strengthen the resilience of the financial sector.
catastrophe risk insurance products; (iii) small
weather monitoring stations to support parametric
The portfolio also includes a Real Estate Cadastre
weather insurance; and (iv) technical assistance for
and Registration project (US$15 million) for
regulatory and policy reforms to create an
digitalization of cadastral maps, and securing land
enabling market environment. The program will
and real estate titles. The Agriculture
enable homeowners, farmers, the enterprise
Strengthening and Accession Project (US$20
sector, and government organizations and
million) aims to improve the delivery of
agencies to purchase dependable catastrophe
government assistance to the agricultural sector in
insurance coverage and/or weather risk insurance
a manner consistent with the European Union's
contracts at competitive prices.
pre-accession requirements.
In infrastructure, the Regional and Local Roads
THE WORLD BANK PROGRAM IN FYR
Program Support Project (US$105 million) is
MACEDONIA
helping with the rehabilitation of the regional and
FYR Macedonia joined the World Bank in 1994.
local roads and provides institutional support to
Since then, the World Bank has provided more
improve the management of roads.
than US$1 billion in loans to support the country's
World Bank financing for the energy sector is
transition to a market economy and build effective
through the ECSEE APL3 project (US$44
9
million) to strengthen transmission and dispatch
and improve the efficiency of the transmission
company MEPSO including an interconnection to
Serbia. The portfolio also includes the Sustainable
Energy Project financed by GEF (US$5.5 million)
which assists in developing a sustainable market
for Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy by
supporting the development of an enabling
framework, institutional capacity, and financing
mechanisms.
The insurance market will be strengthened
through the South East European and Caucasus
Catastrophic Risk Insurance Facility (US$5
million) that will help increase access of
homeowners, farmers, the enterprise sector and
government agencies to financial protection from
losses caused by climate change and geological
hazards.
Local development is assisted through the
Municipal Services Improvement Project (US$25
million), which is helping to improve
transparency, financial sustainability and delivery
of targeted municipal services in selected
municipalities.
The World Bank is also active in the human
development sector through the Conditional Cash
Transfer Project (US$25 million).
Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA)
Over the last two years the Bank's AAA program
shifted to "just-in-time" advisory work while still
delivering core analytical reports. The fiscal year
2012 program includes a Green Growth
assessment with the aim to help the government
mainstream sustainable development and climate
change issues into the macro-economic planning
and decision-making framework. It also includes a
competitiveness assessment, a review of public
expenditures in agriculture, a labor market review,
as well as support with the Open Government
initiative.
10
CONDITIONAL CASH TRANSFER PROJECT
Key Dates:
Approved : June 16, 2009
Effective: October 28, 2009
Closing: February 28, 2014
Financing in million US Dollars:
Financier
Financing
Disbursed*
Undisbursed
IBRD loan
25.00
5.45
19.93
Government
1.30
Total Project Cost
26.30
*World Bank Disbursements as of October 2012.
Note: Disbursements may differ from financing due to exchange rate fluctuations
at the time of disbursement.
the gog
The impact of the global financial crisis and economic downturn has reduced prospects for growth, exports, foreign direct
investments (FDI) and private transfers in 2009. In addition, the poverty has remained high and is likely to increase due to
the impact of the crisis. In this context, the role for effective and efficient social safety nets takes on increasing importance.
Safety nets are part of a broader poverty reduction strategy - interacting with social insurance, health, education, financial
services, and other policies aimed at reducing poverty and managing risk. Safety nets have both short-run roles in alleviating
immediate poverty and inequality, and long-run impacts by enabling households to make better investments for their future.
The Government recognized the fact that the impacts on human capital and reduction in the inter-generational transmission
of poverty can be particularly powerful when safety net programs are directly linked to incentives for investing in education
and health through conditional cash transfers.
The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the effectiveness and efficiency of the FYR Macedonia's social
safety net through (a) the introduction of conditional cash transfers; and (b) improvements in the administration, oversight,
monitoring, and evaluation of social assistance transfers.
The Project is addressing the objective by supporting the implementation of a CCT program for poor families conditioned
upon the secondary school enrollment and attendance of their children, and helping identify and develop possible
extensions of the CCT model in health, labor and/or other levels of education. Besides, the Project is supporting the
improvements in safety net administration, service delivery, oversight, monitoring and evaluation.
Results achieved:
Around 7400 beneficiaries received the CCT benefits during the 2011/12 school year.
In the school year 2011/12, 6340 children from the poor families regularly attended secondary schools due to the
CCT benefit.
The work on technical improvements of the safety net system is finalized, adding the database of the cash benefit
recipients, introducing new business processes, and developing the new Cash Benefits Management Information
System.
Key Partners:
The Bank team worked closely with (i) the Ministry of Labor and Social Policy which was responsible for overall policy
setting as well as for project management; (ii) the Ministry of Education and Science
Key Development Partners included the Government of Japan (which supported the development of this project through
PHRD grants) and the UNICEF (which provided support in the CCT program identification).
11
ENERGY COMMUNITY OF SOUTH EAST EUROPE APL 3
Key Dates:
Approved : January 10, 2006
Effective: May 25, 2006
Closing: March 31, 2014
Financing in million US Dollars:
Financier
Financing
Disbursed*
Undisbursed
IBRD loan
44.1
24.00
23.21
Government
26.9
Total Project Cost
71.0
*World Bank Disbursements as of October 2012.
Note: Disbursements may differ from financing due to exchange rate fluctuations
at the time of disbursement.
Improving the performance of the energy sector is crucial to sustaining economic development and improving
competitiveness in South East Europe (SEE). Power supply in the region is projected to tighten significantly during the next
few years. This will constrain economic activity and affect the quality of life of the citizens if not addressed in a timely
fashion.
The Development Objective of the Energy Community of South East Europe Project is to support the integration of
FYR Macedonia into the regional power market through financing investments in power transmission and institutional
development that would support market participation.
Specifically, the Project has provided investment support and technical assistance to MEPSO (the public electric power
transmission company) with the aim to strengthen transmission and dispatch and improve efficiency of MEPSO to support
its functioning in the context of the regional power market through (a) financing investments necessary to rehabilitate and
upgrade the power transmission network, (b) financing investments to increase the level of interconnection with
neighboring power systems, and (c) strengthening the institutional capacity of MEPSO.
Results achieved:
With the completion of a 19 km transmission line to Greece, regional power trade has been facilitated.
In FYR Macedonia power transit has increased by almost 200% since the finalization of the line.
38 transformation substations throughout the country have been rehabilitated, including the main substation
for the capital of Skopje, the capacity of which has been increased by 78 MVA. This has improved system
stability and has resulted in a reduction of technical losses of 2.2 MW during peak hours.
Key Partners:
The Bank team worked closely with (i) the Ministry of Economy which is responsible for overall policy setting; (ii)
MEPSO (the public electric power transmission company), ultimate recipient of loan resources, and implementer of the
Project. and (iii) the Energy Regulatory Commission.
Key Development Partners included the European Commission, the European Energy community and USAID.
12
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL FUND (GEF) SUSTAINABLE ENERGY PROJECT
Key Dates:
Approved : December 19, 2006
Effective: July 31, 2007
Closing: September 30, 2012
Financing in million US Dollars:
Financier
Financing
Disbursed*
Undisbursed
GEF Grant
5.5
4.17
1.33
Government
0.2
Macedonian Bank for
2.5
Development Promotion
Total Project Cost
8.2
*World Bank Disbursements as of October 2012.
Note: Disbursements may differ from financing due to exchange rate fluctuations at the
time of disbursement.
FYR Macedonia's existing energy resource base is insufficient to cover the country's energy needs. Electricity imports
accounted for about 30% of the total electricity supply in 2009. Furthermore, about 80% of electricity generated is coal-
based, which results in one of the highest CO2 emission factors in the region (about 915 kg of CO2₆/MWh). FYR
Macedonia consumes very little energy per capita but a high amount per unit of gross domestic product (GDP). Therefore,
energy efficiency and renewable energy are crucial tools to improve the country's energy security and reduce CO2 emissions.
The Project's Objective is to develop a sustainable market for energy efficiency and renewable energy by supporting the
development of an enabling framework, institutional capacity, and necessary financing mechanisms.
The Project was restructured in June 2010. It has three components, namely (i) institutional support and technical
assistance to support regulatory and institutional framework for renewable energy and support the creation of the National
Program for Energy Efficiency in Public Buildings; (ii) grant support for energy efficiency in public buildings, focusing on
municipal schools and kindergartens; and (iii) the Sustainable Energy Financing Facility - a credit line established in the
Macedonian Bank for Development Promotion, which will provide seed financing for energy efficiency and renewable
energy development sub-projects.
Results achieved:
Completed Energy Efficiency measures in 18 schools and kindergartens in 6 municipalities.
Created an enabling environment for renewable energy generation by supporting the Energy Regulatory
Commission with the establishment of feed-in tariffs for renewable energy and development of rulebooks on
preferred generation from renewable energy sources.
Made financing available for energy efficiency/renewable energy investments by launching a credit line through the
Macedonian Bank for Development Promotion, which has financed several energy efficiency and renewable energy
projects including a 1 MW solar PV plant near Bitola.
Start up of the second phase of energy efficiency upgrades of schools and kindergartens covering a total of 14
institutions in five municipalities.
Started a wind measurement activity in five municipalities in the country.
Key Partners:
The Bank team is working closely with the Ministry of Economy, which is responsible for overall policy setting in the
energy sector and the Macedonian Bank for Development and Promotion as well as with local banks, which provides
co-financing for the projects financed by the credit line.
Key Development Partners include the European Commission and USAID.
13
REGIONAL AND LOCAL ROADS PROGRAM SUPPORT PROJECT
Key Dates:
Approved : May 13, 2008
Effective: October 17, 2008
Closing: July 31, 2013
Financing in million US Dollars:
Financier
Financing
Disbursed*
Undisbursed
IBRD loan
105.20
61.63
37.68
Total Project Cost
105.20
* World Bank Disbursements October 2012.
Note: Disbursements may differ from financing due to exchange rate fluctuations
at the time of disbursement.
While the road network of FYR Macedonia of 3,781 km of Regional roads and 8,496 km of local roads is considered mostly
adequate in coverage, its condition falls far below the standards of similar networks in European and in most of its
neighboring countries. A technical assessment undertaken in 2007 classified the condition of the regional and local roads
with "significant defects and weakened structural resistance requiring resurfacing or re-gravelling" but without the need to
demolish the pavement and rebuild the road base. This unsatisfactory condition of roads is principally the result of
inadequate attention to management and financing of the network over the last 15 years.
The Project Development Objective is to achieve reduced cost of access to markets and services for communities served
by regional and local roads, by improving the condition and quality of the network of Regional and Local road.
The project's implementation period is 2008 to 2013. It is financing the rehabilitation of about 265 km of paved regional
roads (about 9% of the country's regional roads) and about 420 km of paved and unpaved local roads (about 5% of the
country's local roads). The project also provides assistance to the Agency for State Roads to improve its institutional
capacity, modernize its approach to the management of the road network and implement key elements of the new Public
Law on Roads.
Results achieved:
Regional roads: completed rehabilitation of 284km. Local roads: completed rehabilitation of 280 km.
Technical audits of completed road works carried out and their recommendations being followed up.
Institutional support to focused on (i) establishing a road asset management system; (ii) strengthening
ASR's organizational and decision making arrangements for discharging its mandate in line with the Law
on Public Roads; (iii) diagnostic review and recommendations for development of the Macedonia
domestic construction industry; and (iv) training needs assessment and implementation being launched.
The Agency for State Roads is demonstrating strong commitment to road safety improvement:
A section of a regional road was identified for piloting 'model improvements' to create safer regional
roads. A road safety audit along the road section has been carried out and steps initiated for the
procurement of necessary improvement works;
(i)
all road signs and road markings on regional roads will be replaced in line with the newly enacted laws and
regulations which are consistent with European best practice.
Key Partners:
The Bank team works closely with (i) the Ministry of Transport which is responsible for overall policy setting; (ii) the
Agency for State Roads (ASR), implementer of the Project; and (iii) the National Road Safety Council.
Key Development Partners include the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development who are in parallel financing
a comparable Program. European Union IPA funds may be accessed for subsequent phases of the Program.
14
MUNICIPAL SERVICES IMPROVEMENT PROJECT
Key Dates:
Approved : March 26, 2009
Effective: August 4, 2009
Closing: November 30, 2017
Financing in million US Dollars:
Financier
Financing
Disbursed*
Undisbursed
IBRD loan
75.00
9.75
65.50
Total Project Cost
75.00
*World Bank Disbursements as of October 2012.
Note: Disbursements may differ from financing due to exchange rate fluctuations
at the time of disbursement.
FYR Macedonia has embarked on a decentralization reform process a decade ago. In many areas of their responsibility
municipalities are still unfamiliar with market-based approaches, hampered by outmoded practices and regulations and by
incomplete modernization of land registration. The need for reform in the communal services sector is widely recognized in
the country. Almost all local public services (water, sewerage and solid waste, public lighting, street cleaning and parks,
marketplaces, cemeteries) are provided through municipal-owned communal service enterprises. Most of these services
have suffered pervasively from rigid tariff controls, neglected maintenance, over-employment and poor financial
management, leading to a vicious cycle of further deterioration and lack of funding for new investments. The prevailing
institutional and policy framework, which keeps communal service enterprises overly dependent on their municipal owners
and weakens commercial incentives, does not support the sustainability of services, let alone generate funding for
improvements to meet the demands of the EU acquis.
The Project Development Objective is to improve transparency, financial sustainability and delivery of targeted municipal
services in the participating municipalities.
The project aims to achieve this objective through a focus on infrastructure and services under the responsibility of
participating municipalities and their communal service enterprises, such as water supply, sanitation, and solid waste
management, but may also include support for other functions such as energy efficiency, urban transport, and other services
under municipal provision. It provides sub-loans to municipalities for investments in revenue-generating public services
and other high priority investment projects, as well as technical assistance grants for sub-project preparation, local capacity
building for municipalities and Communal Service Enterprises, and national level institutional strengthening.
Results achieved:
To date, 4 sub-projects have been completed.
The Municipality of Kočani has officially inaugurated a 6.4 km long section of the water supply system that was
rehabilitated with support from the Project. As a result, a total of 11,615 inhabitants in the municipality now benefit
from 24-hour regular water supply;
In Bogdanci, the population benefits from better and more energy efficient street lightning, cutting energy consumption
by more than 50 percent; The project entailed replacement of old mercury bulbs with new compact flouroscent light
bulbs. The project encompassed all inhabited areas. Total 8700 inhabitants will benefit from the project.
The city of Skopje procured equipment for street cleaning and new waste containers; 17 solid waste trucks and 60,000
waste bins have been purchased serving about 250,000 inhabitans
Solid Waste Management collection equipment was procured in the municipalities of Pehcevo, Vevčani, Kruševo, and
Kičevo serving a total of 43,500 inhabitants.
Key Partners:
The Bank team is working closely with the (i) Ministry of Finance which is responsible for overall policy setting as well as
for project management; (ii) Association of Municipalities (ZELS), and (iii) participating municipalities, as ultimate
recipient of loan resources through on-lending arrangements.
A Key Development Partner is USAID, which is providing technical assistance to municipalities on economic and
financial analyses as part of an ongoing USAID-funded program5.
REAL ESTATE CADASTRE AND REGISTRATION PROJECT
Key Dates:
Approved: March 15, 2005
Effective: July 8, 2005
Closing: December 31, 2013
Financing in million USD:
Financier
Financing
Disbursed*
Undisbursed
IBRD loan
12.10
1.66
10.43
Government
2.00
Total Project Cost
14.10
*World Bank Disbursements as of October 2012.
Note: Disbursements may differ from financing due to exchange rate fluctuations
at the time of disbursement.
Description
In 2005, the real estate cadastre covered less than 43% of the country, and uncertain property rights and weak land
registration services created significant constraints to foreign investment. Confidence in the registration and cadastre records
was low as the records were significantly out-of-date, and 60-70% of apartments were not registered at all. The lack of
confidence and difficulty caused by incomplete records had negative effects on private sector investment and development
of the economy overall: many land transactions were not registered, and cadastre and other records (courts, notaries) were
incomplete and out-of-date leading to uncertainty and a lack of trust in the property markets. Property ownership was not
registered consistently in any central place and lack of secure title made mortgage financing difficult or impossible for most
citizens.
The Project Development Objective is to build an efficient and effective real estate cadastre and registration system,
contributing to the development of efficient land and real estate markets.
The Project has helped the Agency for Real Estate Cadastre (AREC) to transform itself from a technical organization
focused on surveying to a service organization focused on customers. One of the main objectives of the project was
improving the Agency's management and monitoring, which consequently led to more efficient and client-oriented way of
working. At the same time, the policy work under the Project has contributed to the new Law on Land Survey, Cadastre,
and Registration of Real Estate Right, which allowed for the development of private sector surveyors. The Government
and the Bank agreed on an Additional Financing loan of EUR 9.0 million in 2010, and the Project was extended for 3 years
to complete the additional activities, including the digital cadastre map and a national spatial data infrastructure which will
contribute to more and better services to citizens and other government partners.
Results achieved:
Since the project's start in 2005:
The coverage of the territory of the country with real estate cadastre grew from 43% in to 99.8%.
The annual number of registered transactions tripled: the average number of transactions per month increased from
42,116 in 2005 to 120,742 in 2011.
Annual mortgages registered in the land administration system doubled from 3,000 in 2005 to more than 9,800 in 2011,
demonstrating a substantial increase in using ownership rights as collateral. Since the project began, over 50,000
mortgages were registered.
In 90% of offices in the country, the project reduced the time to register a sale transaction to 5 days or less-down
from 60 days in 2004.
As of June 2012, there were 273 accredited private surveyors and 137 registered companies providing services directly to
citizens-up from 14 private surveyors and no registered companies at project commencement.
Key Partners: The Bank team has worked closely with the Agency for Real Estate Cadastre (AREC) - the main
implementing agency. Other key government partners include the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Transport, both
of which members of the Land Policy Advisory Committee and have been involved in land policy activities.
Key Development Partners included SIDA-Sweden, Netherlands, JICA and Norway. All have provided grant funds in
parallel with the World Bank financed project to support AREC for capacity building and training, strategy, mapping,
national spatial data infrastructure and IT.
16
17
GREEN GROWTH AND CLIMATE CHANGE ANALYTIC AND ADVISORY SUPPORT PROGRAM
Key Dates:
Approved : June 2011
Closing: August 2013
Financing in million US Dollars:
Financier
Financing
Disbursed
Undisbursed
Sweden
1.4
n/a
n/a
Norway
1.4
Total Project Cost
2.8
To reduce the country's persistently high unemployment and to catch up to EU income levels, FYR Macedonia needs to
accelerate GDP growth through policies, regulations, and investments which enhance long-term growth prospects and job
creation. Maintaining robust economic growth via improved competitiveness has been a central concern of policymakers, in
particular when thinking ahead to the challenges of EU membership. Moreover, as an EU candidate country, the country
must balance the challenge of ensuring continued economic growth and competitiveness with fuller consideration of climate
change and environmental quality. A changing climate is already harming Macedonia's economy, and the country faces
challenges in reducing greenhouse gas emissions and increasing the use of renewable sources of energy. Complying with the
EU environmental acquis, promoting efficient use of natural resources, preserving biodiversity, and enhancing tourism
opportunities are increasingly important to furthering national development.
The main objective of the Green Growth and Climate Change Analytic and Advisory Support Program is to provide
integrated analytic work and non-lending technical assistance across multiple sectors. The Program supports the
Government in (i) assessing the economic costs and benefits of a shift to greener growth, taking into account projected
climate change; and with this knowledge, (ii) prioritizing for implementation actions identified by the National Strategy for
Sustainable Development (NSSD) and supplemented by the Program's recommendations.
The Program is providing analytic work in five sectors (agriculture, water, transport, energy, and urban) and one cross-
cutting theme (social dimensions), along with overarching macroeconomic modeling that will integrate sectoral findings and
recommended actions and derive an optimal green growth policy package. After the conclusion of the analytic work, the
Program will shift towards technical assistance to support the Government in advancing its existing strategy for
sustainability towards implementation, by supplementing the assessments undertaken as part of the NSSD with the new
findings and recommendations under the Program. A more complete and updated strategy for green growth will result,
allowing development of an NSSD Action Plan.
Results achieved:
Building on the assessment of sustainable development laid out in the National Strategy for Sustainable
Development, significant new work under the Program is ongoing, with the following findings to date:
Water is fast becoming a binding constraint as the climate becomes drier,
A changing climate will depress agricultural yields, requiring reform and investments,
Energy efficiency must improve, and the energy sector needs to reduce emissions,
The transport sector needs to adapt to a changing climate and address sharply rising emissions as passenger vehicle
use grows,
Urban performance on energy use, pollution, and emissions is likely to worsen as development tends towards
sprawl rather than compact efficiency, The costs of climate change and the cost of greening the economy will fall
more heavily on some social groups and communities,
Macroeconomic modeling of greener growth will allow for prioritization of actions across sectors.
Key Partners:
The Bank team works closely with (i) the Vice Prime Minister for Economic Affairs, in his capacity of the Chair of the
National Council for Sustainable Development, (ii) Ministry of Environment, (iii) Ministry of Transport
Key Development Partners include the Governments of Sweden and Norway, which generously support this program.
18
AGRICULTURE STRENGTHENING AND ACCESSION PROJECT
Key Dates:
Approved : June 12, 2007
Effective: October 2, 2007
Closing: December 31, 2012
Financing in million US Dollars:
Financier
Financing
Disbursed*
Undisbursed
IBRD loan
20
20.06
0.98
Government
4.90
Total Project Cost
24.90
*World Bank Disbursements as of October 2012.
Note: Disbursements may differ from financing due to exchange rate fluctuations
at the time of disbursement.
Agriculture accounts for 16% of GDP and some 20% of employment in Macedonia. The sector also plays a central
role in rural areas, where almost half of Macedonia's population lives. The sector performance over the last decade has been
mixed, largely due to weather events. In addition, the sector faces multitude constraints to competitiveness including low
levels of investment in farm technology and supply chains, as well as underdeveloped land and rural credit markets. FYR
Macedonia's status as an EU candidate country imposes additional institutional and regulatory requirements on the sector.
The Project Development Objective is to improve the delivery of government assistance to the agriculture sector in a
manner consistent with the European Union's pre-accession requirements.
The Project provides assistance in strengthening the capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water
Economies to support the agriculture sector, including improving its ability to formulate and implement effective
policies and increasing the effectiveness of public expenditures in agriculture - all of this in an EU-compliant manner. In
addition, it provides support for setting up or strengthening the institutional structures necessary for EU accession and for
accessing pre-accession assistance that Macedonia is eligible for. Further, the project assists in strengthening the veterinary
capacity in order to help producers and agro-processors meet new food safety standards driven by changing consumer
preferences and EU regulations. Lastly, the project supports completing the ongoing institutional reform of the irrigation
sector that was initiated under the previous World Bank Irrigation
Restructuring and Rehabilitation Project.
Results achieved:
Significant results have already been achieved in increasing the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economies'
ability to deliver EU rural development funds. The European Commission conferred the right to manage the funds
from the EU Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance for Rural Development (IPARD) to the Macedonian Paying
Agency in December 2009. IPARD has completed four calls for proposal and currently the fifth one is on-going. A
number of projects in the amount of EUR14 mil have been contracted out, of which EUR7 mil are EU funds.
Through investments in both IT equipment and technical assistance, the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water
Economies is increasingly gaining the capacity to track these funds, evaluate their impact, and develop new, effective
rural development policies.
The support to developing effective veterinary capacity has resulted in a reduction in certain veterinary diseases
prevalence (brucellosis and tuberculosis), increased preparedness for disease outbreaks, individual identification and
registration of animals necessary for safeguarding animal and public health, and enhanced food-safety among food
processors.
The project's support to the water sector has resulted in the establishment of Water Economies and Water User
Associations, which ensures sustainability and improved delivery of irrigation and drainage services provided by the
Ministry.
Key Partners: The Bank team works closely with (i) the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy
which is responsible for overall policy setting as well as for project implementation; and (ii) newly formed Paying
Agency (PA), which is in charge of managing the EU IPARD funds.
Key Development Partners: The Bank team is closely coordinating with the EU Delegation in Macedonia, as well
as with the Swedish International Development Agency (SIDA).
19
SOUTH EAST EUROPE AND CAUCASUS CATASTROPHE RISK INSURANCE FACILITY
Key Dates:
Approved : March 3, 2011
Effective: n/a
Closing: December 31, 2015
Financing in million US Dollars*:
Financier
Financing
Disbursed
Undisbursed
IBRD loan
5
2.81
2.19
Total Project Cost
5
FYR Macedonia is particularly vulnerable to natural disasters. Between 1989 and 2006, floods constituted 44% of natural
and technological disasters. Data from the last 20 years reveals a steadily rising trend of natural disaster incidence, flood
severity, and flood intensity. The country is doubly impacted because, while flooding has shown a rising trend; the effects
of climate change have also been seen in increased incidence of droughts. In addition, FYR Macedonia is located in the
Mediterranean seismic belt. The 1963 earthquake killed more than 1,000 people and damaged 80% of the building stock in
Skopje.
The Project Development Objective is to help increase access of homeowners, farmers, the enterprise sector and
government agencies to financial protection from losses caused by climate change and geological hazards.
The program will support Southeast Europe and Caucasus (SEEC) countries' efforts to join Europa Re by financing their
membership contributions to the Facility. Europa Re, in turn, will facilitate the growth of catastrophe risk insurance markets
in the member countries. For the program's first phase, this component will be financed by IBRD loans (for Serbia and
FYR Macedonia) and IDA credits (for Bosnia and Herzegovina and Georgia). The SEEC CRIF will also work on building
the technical capacities through a grant, financed by donor funds and a GEF grant and implemented by Europa Re, which
includes: (i) risk mapping and modelling for participating countries; (ii) design and pricing of appropriate catastrophe risk
insurance products; (iii) small weather monitoring stations to support parametric weather insurance; and (iv) technical
assistance for regulatory and policy reforms to create an enabling market environment.
Results achieved:
The most important expected result of the program is the increased access to affordable weather risk coverage and
catastrophe insurance for millions of people and thousands of Small and Medium enterprises in the region. The aim is
to raise catastrophe insurance penetration among beneficiaries from the current 1%-5% to 15% of homeowners,
farmers, enterprises and government entities over the next 5 years.
The key beneficiaries of SEEC CRIF are homeowners, farmers, the enterprise sector and government
organizations/agencies which will be able to buy dependable catastrophe insurance coverage and/or index-based
parametric weather risk insurance contracts at competitive prices. Direct beneficiaries also include local insurance
companies in the participating countries which will be able to expand and deepen their insurance business.
Key Partners: The Bank team works closely with (i) the Ministry of Finance, which is responsible for overall policy
setting as well as for project implementation; (ii) Insurance Supervision Agency, and (iii) private insurance companies.
Key Development Partners:
The Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs is providing a US$4.5 million grant to finance the establishment of the
Europa Re company. The Bank team is closely coordinating with the EU Delegation in Macedonia.
20